Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         STATE DEPARTMENT FOR FORESTRY (SDF)




                               KENYA WATERSHED SERVICES IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (KEWASIP)

                                                      (P509738)




Public Disclosure Authorized                   PROCESS FRAMEWORK (PF)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                   DECEMBER 2025




                                                                                        1
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

 ASAL       Arid and Semi-Arid Land

 BETA       Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda

            Climate Action through Landscape Management
 CALM
            PforR

 CBD        Convention on Biological Diversity

 CCDR       Country Climate and Development Report

 CEC        County Environment Committee

 CFA        Community Forest Association

 CIF        Climate Investment Funds

 CoG        Council of Governors

 CPCU       County Project Coordination Unit

 CPSAC      County Project Steering and Advisory Committee

 CRI        Climate Resilience Indicator

 CSA        Climate Smart Agriculture

            Directorate of Remote Surveys and Resource
 DRSRS
            Sensing

            Directorate of Occupational Safety and Health
 DOSHS
            Services

 EHSGs      Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines

 EIA        Environment Impact Assessment

 EMCA       Environmental Management and Coordination Act

 ESF        Environment and Social Framework

 ESIA       Environment and Social Impact Assessment

 ESMP       Environment and Social Management Plan


                                                             2
ESSs      Environment and Social Standards

FAO       Food and Agriculture Organization

FCMA      Forest Conservation and Management Act

FFS       Farmer Field Schools

FLLOCA    Financing Locally Led Climate Action

GEF       Global Environment Facility

GHG       Greenhouse Gas

GoK       Government of Kenya

GRS       Grievance Redress Service

Ha        Hectare

ICT       Information and Communication Technology

IDA       International Development Association

IEMP      Integrated Ecosystem Management Plans

IFAD      International Fund for Agricultural Development

IP        Indigenous People

IPF       Investment Project Financing

IWC       Integrated Watershed Committees

IWUA      Irrigation Water Users Associations

          Kenya Agricultural Productivity and Sustainable
KAPSLMP
          Landscape Management Project

KCSAP     Kenya Climate-Smart Agriculture Project

KEFRI     Kenya Forestry Research Institute

KEWASIP   Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project

KFS       Kenya Forest Service

Ksh       Kenyan Shilling




                                                            3
KWS      Kenya Wildlife Service

         Kenya Water Security and Climate Resilience
KWSCRP
         Project

M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation

         Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and
MECCF
         Forestry

MoA      Ministry of Agriculture

MRV      Measurement, Reporting, And Verification

MTP      Medium-Term Plan

NBEs     Nature-Based Enterprises

NCCAP    National Climate Change Action Plan

NDC      Nationally Determined Contributions

NECC     National Environmental Complaints Committee

NEMA     National Environment Management Authority

NET      National Environment Tribunal

NGEC     National Gender and Equality Commission

         National Landscape and Ecosystem Restoration
NLERS
         Programme Strategy 2023-2032

NMK      National Museums of Kenya

NPC      Nature, People, and Climate

NPCU     National Project Coordination Unit

NPSC     National Project Steering Committee

NTAC     National Technical Advisory Committee

         Operations   Environmental    and    Social   Review
OESRC
         Committee

OHS      Occupational Health and Safety



                                                                4
PAD      Project Appraisal Document

PCE      Private Capital Enabled

PCM      Private Capital Mobilization

PCRA     Participatory Climate Risk Assessments

PDO      Project Development Objective

PES      Payment for Ecosystem Services

PF       Process Framework

PFM      Public Finance Management

PFMP     Participatory Forest Management Plan

PPP      Public-Private Partnership

         Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
REDD
         Degradation

RMP      Resource Management Plan

SCMP     Sub-Catchment Management Plan

SDA      State Department for Agriculture

         State Department for Environment and Climate
SDECC
         Change

SDF      State Department for Forestry

SDI      State Department for Irrigation

SDW      State Department for Wildlife

SDWS     State Department for Water and Sanitation

SEA/SH   Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment

SESA     Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment

SFM      Sustainable Forest Management

SLM      Sustainable Land Management

SLWM     Sustainable Land and Water Management


                                                            5
          Transforming Health Systems for Universal Care
THS-UCP
          Project

ToR       Terms of Reference

VMG       Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups

WB        World Bank

          Water Catchment Conservation and Protection
WCCPC
          Committee

WIBA      Work Injury Benefit Act

WMP       Watershed Management Plans

WRA       Water Resources Authority

WRUA      Water Resource Users Association




                                                           6
         TABLE OF CONTENTS




LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................... 2

TABLE OF CONTENTS .............................................................................................. 7

2.    PURPOSE OF THE PROCESS FRAMEWORK ..................................................... 24

WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL STANDARDS (ESSS) .................................... 26

3. IMPLEMENTING THE PROCESS FRAMEWORK AND COLLABORATING
ORGANIZATIONS ..................................................................................................29

4.    POLICY, LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORKS ........................................31

4.1    INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ 31
4.2    APPLICABLE NATIONAL POLICIES, LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORKS ................31
4.3    RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL TREATIES .................................................................. 42

5. POTENTIAL RESTRICTIONS ON ACCESS TO NATURAL RESOURCES AND
IMPACTS ON LIVELIHOODS ................................................................................. 45

5.1    INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ 45
5.2    POTENTIAL SOCIAL IMPACTS OF KEWASIP ......................................................... 46
5.3    LIVELIHOOD RESTRICTIONS ............................................................................... 69

6. ELIGIBILITY AND MEASURES FOR MITIGATION FOR AFFECTED
COMMUNITIES ..................................................................................................... 74

6.1 MITIGATION MEASURES .................................................................................... 74
6.3 CONSULTATIONS WITH COMMUNITIES IN THE PROJECT AREAS ................................ 76
CONSULTATIONS DURING IMPLEMENTATION .................................................................... 80
III. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR AFFECTED PERSONS AND COMMUNITIES ......................... 82
6.4 PROPOSED MEASURES TO ASSIST AFFECTED PERSONS AND COMMUNITIES ................ 84
6.5 CONSIDERATIONS FOR MINORITIES AND MARGINALIZED GROUPS ............................86
6.8 COMMUNITY GRANTS COMMITTEES (CGCS) ......................................................... 89

7.    THE GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM (GRM) ............................................ 90

7.1    INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ 90
7.2    THE GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM AND PROCESS ............................................91

                                                                                                                     7
8. INSTITUTIONAL AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS FOR PROCESS
FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................................ 93

8.1    INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ 93
8.2    INSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE PROCESS FRAMEWORK IMPLEMENTATION 94

9.    MONITORING AND EVALUATION ARRANGEMENTS .....................................102

9.1 INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. 102
9.2 PURPOSE AND APPROACH FOR MONITORING ....................................................... 102
9.3 MONITORING SCOPE, INDICATORS AND ARRANGEMENTS ...................................... 104
PROJECT ADMINISTRATIVE REPORTING ...................................................................... 106
9.4 SOCIO-ECONOMIC MONITORING ....................................................................... 106
9.5 REPORTING AND INFORMATION DISSEMINATION .................................................107

10. INDICATIVE BUDGET FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROCESS
FRAMEWORK ...................................................................................................... 108

11.    STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS AND DISCLOSURE .................................111

11.1     INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................111
11.2     CONSULTATIONS UNDER THE PROCESS FRAMEWORK .......................................... 112
11.3     DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS ......................................................................... 113

12.    ANNEXES ....................................................................................................116




                                                                                                                     8
1.0 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background and Strategic Context of KEWASIP
Kenya has achieved significant economic progress in recent years, yet it
continues to face persistent development challenges that include climate
change,    land    degradation,     and     unsustainable    natural    resource
management. While real GDP grew at an average of 4.7 percent between
2015 and 2019 and poverty rates declined, the country’s dependence on
climate-sensitive sectors especially agriculture, forestry, and pastoralism
has left it vulnerable to environmental shocks. Increasing fiscal pressures
and the impacts of recent droughts and floods have further exposed the
fragility of livelihoods, particularly in rural and forest-adjacent areas.
Natural capital is central to Kenya’s economy, contributing approximately
42 percent of GDP and supporting nearly 70 percent of jobs. Forests,
rangelands, and water catchment areas play a crucial role in sustaining
agricultural production, water supply, biodiversity, and energy generation.
However, some form of degradation affects an estimated 88.6 percent of
Kenya’s   land.   Deforestation,    soil   erosion, and     encroachment     into
ecologically sensitive areas have contributed to declining productivity and
increased conflict over natural resources.


Marginalized communities, such as the Ogiek, Sengwer, Yiaku, and other
forest-dependent and pastoralist communities are among the groups most
affected by these environmental and socio-economic changes. These
communities have strong cultural, spiritual, and subsistence ties to forests,
rivers, wetlands, and highland ecosystems. However, their access to
traditional lands and resources is increasingly constrained by deforestation,
land use conversion, and development pressures. Insecure land tenure,
weak participation in formal governance structures, and limited access to
basic services further exacerbate their vulnerability.
In this context, the Government of Kenya is implementing the Kenya
Watershed Services Improvement Project (KEWASIP), which aims to


                                                                                    9
restore degraded landscapes, enhance climate resilience, and improve the
sustainability of watershed services across key ecosystems. The project
supports national commitments outlined in Kenya Vision 2030, the National
Landscape and Ecosystem Restoration Strategy (2023–2032), the National
Climate Change Action Plan (2023–2027), and Kenya’s Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement.


KEWASIP     adopts    a   community-driven    and    participatory    approach,
promoting sustainable land and water management, enhancing biodiversity
conservation, and strengthening the livelihoods of the vulnerable
populations. The project places strong emphasis on social inclusion,
gender equality, and the integration of Marginalized communities in the
planning, implementation, and monitoring of project activities.


In accordance with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Standard 7
(ESS7)     on     indigenous    peoples/Sub-Saharan       African    Historically
Underserved Traditional Local Communities, this marginalized communities
Planning Framework (MCPF) has been developed to ensure that KEWASIP
is implemented in a culturally appropriate and inclusive manner. The
outlines    measures       to    identify    Vulnerable      &      marginalized
groups/marginalized communities in the project areas, assess potential
benefits and risks, ensure their meaningful participation and Free, Prior,
and Informed Consent (FPIC) where applicable, and develop specific
Marginalized communities Plans (IPPs) where needed.


Through    this   framework,    KEWASIP     aims    to    protect   Marginalized
communities’ rights, support their development aspirations, and ensure
they equitably benefit from investments in sustainable watershed services
and ecosystem restoration.




1.2 Project Objectives



                                                                                    10
The Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (KEWASIP) includes
three key objectives:
1. Strengthening Watershed Planning, Governance, and Monitoring: This
    objective   focuses   on    building   institutional   capacity,   improving
    governance structures, and establishing a monitoring system to
    support effective watershed management.


2. Promoting Sustainable Land Management Practices and Restoring
    Landscapes: This objective involves Implementing land management
    practices that restore degraded landscapes and ensure the sustainable
    use of natural resources.


3. Enhancing Public Land Management and Restoration of Gazetted and
    Protected Areas: This objective aims to improve the management of
    public lands and restore protected areas to safeguard biodiversity and
    ecosystem services.


1.3 Project Components
The Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (KEWASIP) entails
three main components, each designed to achieve the Project's objectives
effectively:


Component 1: Roots to Resilience: Foundation for Integrated
Long-term Project.
This component aims to establish a strong foundation for Sustainable
Landscape and Watershed Management (SLWM) through enhanced
institutional capabilities, improved governance, and innovative financing
mechanisms. It supports the development of an integrated monitoring
system to facilitate informed decision-making and enhance landscape
resilience.


Component 2: Green Horizons: Sustainable Landscape and
Watershed Revitalization. This component focuses on restoring

                                                                                   11
degraded    landscapes   and    managing    ecosystems    through    targeted
investments in selected watersheds. It promotes community resilience by
adopting a participatory approach to plan and implementing SLWM
activities, with an emphasis on both watershed assessments and
community-driven initiatives.


Component 3: Project Management, Training & Capacity Building.
The objective of this component is to ensure effective planning, budgeting,
implementation, and reporting of project activities, aligned with World
Bank standards. It emphasizes training and capacity building to support
successful project execution.
1.4 Spatial Distribution of Project Sites
KEWASIP will be implemented across diverse regions of Kenya, targeting
counties based on critical factors such as land degradation levels, water
security, social vulnerability, climate change vulnerability, and conservation
priorities. Owing to the continued existential threats that arise due to
farming and human settlements which result in encroachment on riparian
areas and forests, a vast majority of the project will take place in modified
habitats, or in areas that are already anthropogenically impacted. The
selected counties span various geographical and ecological zones, ensuring
comprehensive coverage and impact:


Table 1: Project Sites

Region                   Water                         Counties
                         Towers/Watershed

Northern                 Mt. Marsabit                  Marsabit

                         Ndotos                        Samburu

Eastern                  Chyullu                       Makueni

Central                  Marmanet                      Laikipia,
                                                       Baringo,

 Eastern                 Nyambene                      Isiolo, Meru,



                                                                                 12
                                                         Kitui,     Tana
                                                         River,
                                                         Garissa,
                                                         Tharaka Nithi

Coastal                   Shimba Hills                   Kwale


The Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (KEWASIP) is being
developed under the World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework
(ESF). In line with Environmental and Social Standard ESS10 on
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure, the MoECCF should
provide stakeholders with timely, relevant, continuous, understandable,
and accessible information, and consult with them in a culturally
appropriate manner, which is free of manipulation, interference, coercion,
discrimination, or intimidation.


This Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) as a tool for keeping
stakeholders informed throughout the project life cycle. This is meant to
ensure appropriate project information on environmental and social risks
and impacts is disclosed to stakeholders in a timely, understandable,
accessible and appropriate manner. Stakeholders will be actively involved
in decision making and project implementation processes and where
necessary,   existing   mechanisms       will   be   enhanced     or   additional
mechanisms developed to align with ESS 10.




Figure 1: Map of the project sites.

                                                                                    13
1.5 Project Beneficiaries
The project targets to benefit 750,000 people in the selected hydrosheds
in the 12 Counties namely; Baringo, Meru, Kitui, Tharaka Nithi, Samburu,
Isiolo, Marsabit, Makueni, Garissa, Kwale, Tana River and Laikipia including
MCs living in the project area. Project beneficiaries will be classified as
direct or indirect beneficiaries depending on where they live (i.e., inside or
adjacent to project areas) and how they are affected by project
interventions and activities (e.g., training, reduced risks, livelihoods,


                                                                                 14
spillover effects, etc.). Beneficiaries will be further classified with the aim
of measuring the Project’s gender and Vulnerable Marginalized Groups
(VMG) inclusion results. The Project will use the watershed approach as
the unit for integrated planning and management of ecosystems within the
project-selected areas. The overarching factors used to identify the project
area are the gazetted water towers and the major rivers originating from
water towers and the downstream flows of these rivers. To ensure that the
project area reflects the potential amount of financing proceeds and
effective consolidation of interventions within the watersheds, additional
information on land degradation and SLM cost-benefit considerations were
used to identify a smaller number of watersheds to ensure the limited
resources can generate measurable outcomes. The final list of selected
watersheds will be determined in combination with practical, on-the-
ground considerations and subject to the available financing.


1.6 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The KEWASIP will adopt a three-tiered implementation arrangement
involving national, county, and community levels. At the national level, a
National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) will provide overall project
oversight and policy guidance, while a National Technical Advisory
Committee (NTAC) will offer technical support to ensure environmental,
social, and economic objectives are met. The project will have a National
Project Coordinating Unit (NPCU) established under the State Department
for Forestry. The main role of NPCU is the day-to-day coordination and
management of project activities, and implementation of activities at
National Level. At the county level, the County Project Steering and
Advisory Committee (CPSAC), the County Technical Advisory Committee
(CTAC) and the County Project Coordinating Units (CPCUs) will be
established in relevant counties. The CPSAC will provide overall project
oversight and policy guidance at the County level. While the CTAC will
provide technical advice to the CPCU which is responsible of the day-to-
day execution, and will be composed of technical officers from KFS, NEMA,
WRA, KEFRI, KWS and county officers. The NTAC will coordinate between


                                                                                  15
different CTACs to ensure participatory plans from the different counties
are integrated and activities proposed complement each other. The NPCU
under the State Department for Forestry will handle daily project
management, monitoring and evaluation, and review and approval of
CPCUs’ work plans. The CPCUs will oversee project execution, consolidate
plans, and monitor activities at county level.


At the community level, the organization will revolve around Community-
Based Organizations (CBOs), which will represent beneficiary communities
at the grassroots and ensure participatory identification, preparation, and
implementation of restoration and livelihood sub-projects. These structures
will prioritize the inclusion of Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups and
Communities to enhance social and economic participation in targeted
rural areas. The project activities will be informed by the project integrated
watershed management plans which harmonizes County Integrated
Development Plans (CIDPs), County Spatial Plans, Participatory Climate
Risk Assessments (PCRAs), and other plans such as Participatory Forest
Management Plans (PFMPs), Sub-Catchment Management Plans (SCMPs),
and Climate Risk Management Action Plans, ensuring that local climate
vulnerabilities are incorporated into planning and implementation. The
project also links closely with existing entities like local community groups,
Community Forest Associations (CFAs), Watershed User Associations
(WRUAs), and Conservancies, ensuring collaborative implementation at the
grassroots level. The project will be implemented in coordination with
technical agencies such as SDF, SDECC, SDI, SDW, WRA, KFS, KEFRI, KWS,
NEMA, and CoG.


KEWASIP will adopt a three-tiered approach representing implementation
at national, county, and community levels as shown in the organogram
below.




                                                                                 16
  The roles of each unit in the implementation structure are defined below:


A. National Level
  a. The National Project Steering Committee (NPSC)
  The National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) will be established within
  30 days of the Effective Date to provide overall project oversight and
  policy guidance. The Committee will be chaired by the Principal Secretary
  (PS) of the State Department for Forestry (SDF) in the Ministry of
  Environment,   Climate   Change    and   Forestry   (MoECCF)    (the   lead
  Implementing Agency). This committee will constitute the Principal
  Secretaries from State Department for Environment and Climate Change
  (SDECC), State Department for Irrigation (SDI), State Department for


                                                                                17
Wildlife (SDW), State Department for Water and Sanitation (SDWS),
Council of Governors (CoG), The National Treasury (TNT), Chief Executive
Officers (CEOs), Director Generals (DGs) and Chief Conservator of Forests
(CCF) of the implementing agencies. The National Project Coordinator will
initiate the process of constituting this committee. It will involve the
preparation of a briefing note to the PS, SDF covering the proposed
membership of the committee, its functions, and proposed dates for the
inaugural meeting. Members of the NPSC will be provided with necessary
documents for the Project, including (but not limited to) the Project
Appraisal Document (PAD) and the Financing Agreement.


The NPSC will be responsible for: (a) approving the annual national and
county work plans and budgets and the annual Procurement Plan; and (b)
reviewing the annual implementation performance report to be prepared
by the implementing agencies, and compiled by the SDF, and overseeing
the implementation of corrective actions, if needed.


Project implementation will require effective inter-ministerial coordination,
collaboration, and information sharing. A ToR will be developed during the
first months of project implementation for the NPSC in accordance with
national procedures. ToRs define roles and commitments in terms of staff
allocations and resources.


b. The National Technical Advisory Committee (NTAC)
The National Technical Advisory Committee (NTAC) - The PS State
Department for Forestry will constitute the NTAC, within 30 days of the
Effective Date. NTAC will be responsible for providing technical support
to the overall implementation of the project and operational aspects of the
project and ensuring that recommendations from the NPSC are
implemented. They will also provide expert advice to ensure the project
meets its environmental, social, and economic objectives.
The committee will compose of Technical Experts from the Participating
entities, which will include Kenya Forest Service (KFS), Kenya Forestry


                                                                                18
Research Institute (KEFRI), National Environment Management Authority
(NEMA), Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS), Water Resources Authority (WRA),
National Environment Trust Fund (NETFUND), Directorate of Remote
Surveys and Resource Sensing (DRSRS), Council of Governors (CoG), State
Department for Irrigation (SDI), and SDW. These will be Technical Experts
like GIS and Data Analysts, Water Resource Experts, Forestry and Land
Restoration   Specialists,   Climate   Change   Specialists;   and   Research
Institutions like Kenya Forestry Research Institute (KEFRI). The NTAC will
also support the development and implementation of technical components
such as watershed prioritization and capacity building.
The NTAC will provide technical support to the NPCU in reviewing plans
and proposals on public land and to the CPCUs & CTACs to review and
refine plans and proposals for project implementation at the county level.


c. National Project Coordinating Unit
The project will have a National Project Coordinating Unit (NPCU)
established under the State Department for Forestry. The establishment of
the NPCU will be an effective condition for the Project. The PS, SDF will
constitute the NPCU which will be led by a National Project Coordinator
(NPC). The membership of NPCU will be composed of component leads,
project officers, finance officer, project accountant, procurement officers
M&E officers, environment and social officers, communication officer, ICT
officer and support staff.


The main mechanism for filling positions of the NPCU will be competitive
deployment of staff based on ToRs agreed between the government and
the World Bank. Recruitment of NPCU staff from the market will be done
only where internal capacity is inadequate. The NPC will serve as the
secretary to both NPSC and NTAC. The main role of NPCU is the day-to-
day coordination and management of project activities.


The NPCU will be responsible for: (a) establishing policy guidelines and
providing overall oversight of project implementation; (b) preparing the


                                                                                19
  annual national work plans and budgets and the annual Procurement Plan;
  and (c) preparing the annual implementation performance report to be
  prepared by the implementing agencies, and compiled by the SDF, and
  overseeing the implementation of corrective actions, if needed. The NPCU
  will oversee the planning and implementation of activities identified under
  Components 1 and 3.       The NPCU will also be responsible for decision-
  making related to the approval of plans and allocation of funds for
  Component 2 activities.     This will include the review and approval of
  annual allocations to counties to support activities to be financed under
  Sub-Component 2a and allocations to relevant national entities to
  implement ecosystem management plans under Sub-Component 2b.


 B. County Level
  The project implementation and oversight structures at the county level for
  private and community lands will include County Project Steering
  Committee (CPSC), County Project Technical Advisory Committee (CPTAC)
  and County Project Coordination Unit (CPCU). The PS, SDF will enter into
  an Inter-Governmental Partnership Agreement (IPA) detailing mutual
  responsibilities for the project's implementation with the respective county
  governments. At the same time, a Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) and
  Grants Agreement (GA) will thereafter be effected between the county
  governments and the CIGs who are the beneficiaries of the sub-projects
  grants. The CPSC, CTAC and the CPCU will be established no later than
  one month once a Inter-Governmental Partnership Agreement is signed
  with the participating counties.


 i.   County Project Steering Committee (CPSC)
A County Project Steering Committee (CPSC) shall be established in each
County Government implementing the KEWASIP. The CPSC will be
constituted by the CECM responsible for Environment and Forestry within 1
month after the signing of the IPA. The CPSC will be chaired by the County
Executive Committee (CECM) member in charge of Environment and Forestry.
All members of the CPSC will be provided with relevant project documents to


                                                                                 20
enable them to perform their duties effectively. These will include the IPA,
PAD, FA, and Roles & Responsibilities of the CPSC. The CPSC membership will
be comprised of chief officers for environment and natural resources, water
and irrigation, agriculture, livestock, fisheries, cooperatives, women and
gender.


The CPSC will be responsible for project oversight and quality assurance at
the county level. It will be responsible for reviewing proposed annual activity
plans prepared by the CPCUs. Once approved, these will be submitted to the
NPCU for review and approval on an annual basis.


 ii.   County Technical Advisory Committee (CTAC)
The CTAC will be responsible for providing technical support to the overall
implementation of the project and its operational aspects at the county level,
ensuring that recommendations from the County Project Steering Committee
(CPSC) are implemented. They will also provide expert advice to ensure the
activities meets its environmental, social, and economic objectives.


The CTAC will be composed of county directors of relevant departments and
technical experts from representatives of national Participating Entities in the
respective counties (KEFRI, KFS, WRA, KWS, NEMA, Children Officers, Social
Development Officers, NIA etc.), relevant MDAs in the respective counties
and a representative of the marginalized communities.
Each CTAC shall include at least one representative from each key subgroup
within the marginalized communities (e.g., women, youth, persons with
disabilities, and minorities & marginalized Communities) identified through
county stakeholder mapping and engagement. Minority and marginalized
groups representation will be rotated periodically and guided by principles of
equity and inclusion to ensure balanced participation. The CTAC will provide
technical support to the County Project Coordination Unit (CPCU) in reviewing
plans and proposals on public, community and private lands.




                                                                                   21
iii.   County Project Coordinating Units (CPCU)
A County Project Coordinating Unit shall be established for each county
where the Project is being implemented and will be embedded into the
respective county government – in the Environment and Forestry sector
department. They will be responsible for the day-to-day project execution in
each county. Each CPCU will comprise the County Project Coordinator (CPC)
who will be the head of the unit. The unit will comprise, Environment officer,
Social officer, County M&E Officer, County Project Accountant, County
Procurement officer and support staff (secretary, drivers, cleaner), and any
other relevant expertise required. These staff are seconded to the project on
a full-time basis by the county government. Recruitment of additional CPCU
staff from the market will be done only where internal capacity is inadequate.
The CPCU coordinator serves as the Secretary to the CEC.


CPCUs will be responsible for providing general coordination and oversight of
the Project at the county level, undertake the call for proposals prepared at
county and community level and consolidating these into a proposed annual
activity plan.   NTAC will support CPCUs in reviewing and refining these
documents prior to submission to the CEC for review. Amended activity plans
will then be submitted to the NPCU for review and approval. The CPCU will
also be responsible for oversight, monitoring and reporting of all project
activities on private and community lands, and the CPSAC will approve
documents such as the annual work plans and the proposal from the CBOs.


C. Community Level
At the community level, the implementation of KEWASIP sub-projects will be
carried out by Community Interest Groups (CIGs). These groups will serve as
the primary entry point for grant-financed activities focused on sustainable
land and water management, ecosystem restoration, and climate-resilient
livelihood enhancement. CIGs will work in close collaboration with existing
community institutions such as Community Forest Associations (CFAs), Water
Resources Users Associations (WRUAs), Conservancies, and, where applicable,
Marginalized communities’ representative institutions. Participation by CIGs is


                                                                                  22
contingent upon the submission and approval of grant applications, prepared
in accordance with the eligibility criteria and procedures set out in the
KEWASIP Grant Manual.
The PF will require that CIGs be formed through transparent community
meetings convened by the CPCU in collaboration with local administration,
ensuring at least 30% representation of and inclusion of MCs/VMGs. CIG
constitutions will include clear accountability mechanisms such as rotational
leadership, annual community audits, and grievance procedures. Stakeholder
feedback gathered through consultations and PF implementation reviews will
inform periodic updates of the KEWASIP Grant Manual to ensure alignment
with local priorities and social inclusion requirements.


To promote integration and coordination at the watershed level, Integrated
Hydrosheds Committees (IHCs) will be formed. Each IHC shall consist of at
least one representative from each participating CIG, conservancy, and
marginalized community subgroup. Membership will not exceed 15 to ensure
functionality. Functions of the IHC will be to coordinate PF implementation
activities across CIGs and other groups; support verification of agreed access
rules, community agreements, and livelihood measures; participate in joint
monitoring of environmental and social mitigation measures;              compile
quarterly watershed-level reports for submission to the CPCU and CTAC; and
provide early identification of potential conflicts and support local resolutions
through the GRM.The PF will require the CPCU to provide periodic E&S
training and technical backstopping to IHC members to strengthen their
capacity for environmental and social monitoring. IHCs will submit quarterly
reports to the CTAC and CPCU for review, ensuring participatory oversight
and transparency
The Integrated Hydro shed Committees will act as intermediaries between
community-level implementers and the county-level coordination structures.
They will transmit consolidated proposals and progress reports to the County
Project Coordination Units (CPCUs) and the County Technical Advisory
Committees (CTACs). While CTACs will review the technical soundness and




                                                                                    23
E&S compliance of the proposals, CPCUs will provide operational guidance,
ensure fiduciary and E&S oversight, and coordinate implementation support.




   2. Purpose of the Process Framework
As part of the preparation of the Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project
(KEWASIP), a Process Framework (PF) has been developed to guide the
management of potential restrictions on people’s access to natural resources
resulting from project-supported conservation and restoration investments across
the earmarked project sites. While the Project will not involve physical resettlement
or land acquisition, restrictions on access to resources in legally designated parks
and gazetted forests may nonetheless affect community livelihoods, cultural
practices, and social wellbeing.

To address these risks, and in line with World Bank Environmental and Social
Standard 5 (ESS5), the PF establishes transparent, inclusive, and participatory
processes through which potentially affected communities and stakeholders are
engaged in the design, implementation, and monitoring of project activities. The PF
also provides structured tools for addressing disputes, ensuring livelihood support,
and balancing conservation objectives with the needs of different stakeholders.

Specifically, the Process Framework will:

      Inclusive Stakeholder Participation: Ensure that all affected groups—
       including local communities, Indigenous Peoples (IPs), vulnerable and
       marginalized groups, government agencies, Protected Area (PA) authorities,
       community     institutions,   private   sector   actors,   and    conservation
       organizations—are meaningfully engaged in the design of project activities.
       Their knowledge, priorities, and customary governance systems will inform
       decision-making processes.

      Transparent Identification of Affected Persons: Define fair and
       participatory criteria for identifying individuals and groups whose access to
       resources may be restricted, and determine eligibility for support and benefit-
       sharing measures.



                                                                                   24
   Livelihood Restoration and Benefit-Sharing: Provide measures to
    enable affected persons to maintain or improve their livelihoods and living
    standards through alternative livelihoods, benefit-sharing mechanisms, or
    other community-driven solutions.

   Community-driven resource governance and continued access deals
    with the rights, governance, and negotiated access regimes (institutional and
    social aspects) that ensure communities retain equitable and sustainable
    access to natural resources while supporting conservation and restoration
    objectives under KEWASIP.

   Conflict Resolution and Grievance Redress: Establish accessible
    mechanisms and tools for managing disputes related to access restrictions,
    including:

       o   grievance redress mechanisms (GRMs);

       o   culturally appropriate communication and awareness campaigns;

       o   recognition of customary governance and conflict resolution systems;

       o   collaborative community resource management approaches;

       o   enhanced monitoring and reporting arrangements; and

       o   improved access to judicial systems where necessary.

   Early and On-going Engagement: Promote continuous engagement
    throughout project preparation and implementation to foster trust, mutual
    understanding, and cooperation. This will help reduce conflicts, establish clear
    rules for access, and secure agreements on the sustainable use and
    management of PAs.

   Clear Rules and Agreements on Access: Clarify the processes by which
    access restrictions will be determined, communicated, and discussed with
    stakeholders,   and   establish   transparent   agreements    on   usage    and
    management.

   Institutional Responsibilities: Specify the roles and responsibilities of
    relevant government agencies, PA authorities, community institutions, and


                                                                                 25
       project implementation units in applying the PF and managing related
       financial and administrative tasks.

      Integration with Other E&S Instruments: Complements the ESMF, MCPF,
       and ESCP by specifically addressing restrictions on access to natural resources
       that do not entail physical displacement or land acquisition. Where site-
       specific circumstances might lead to physical or economic displacement
       beyond restricted access, a Resettlement Plan (RP) or Livelihood Restoration
       Plan will be prepared in accordance with ESS5. The ESMF will guide screening
       and determine which instrument applies, ensuring no duplication or
       inconsistency among frameworks. FPIC requirements under ESS7 and
       culturally appropriate engagement procedures under the IPPF will be applied
       for MCs/VMGs.

      Participatory Monitoring and Accountability: Define participatory
       monitoring arrangements to track adverse and beneficial impacts, assess the
       effectiveness of mitigation and benefit-sharing measures, and strengthen
       accountability in PF implementation.

In sum, the PF provides a comprehensive, structured, and transparent framework
for managing access restrictions in a fair and equitable manner. It ensures that
potentially affected stakeholders are not only protected from adverse impacts but
also empowered to participate in decision-making and to share in the benefits of the
Project. The processes described in the PF will apply throughout the entire project
cycle, from planning through implementation and monitoring.

World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs)

Table 2: Applicable World Bank ESSs for KEWASIP
ESSs Applicable by                 Its Relevance
the Project
ESS1       Assessment        and    KEWASIP activities have environmental and
Management of Environmental          social     risks   linked   to    restoration,
and Social Risks and Impacts         governance reforms, access arrangements,
                                     and      community-based    activities.   ESS1
                                     requires risk identification, assessment, and


                                                                                      26
ESSs Applicable by                   Its Relevance
the Project
                                      management through instruments such as
                                      the    ESMF,    PF,    IPPF,    and       SEP.    All
                                      subprojects will undergo E&S screening.
ESS2    Labor    and       Working    The project will involve direct, contracted,
Conditions                            and community workers for restoration,
                                      nurseries, water structures, and monitoring.
                                      ESS2 requires fair labor practices, OHS
                                      measures, and prevention of child and
                                      forced labor, implemented through the
                                      LMP.
ESS3 Resource Efficiency and  Activities involve use of natural resources
Pollution     Prevention       and    (water, soil, biomass) and may include
Management                            chemicals for invasive species control. ESS3
                                      ensures efficient resource use and pollution
                                      control    in   restoration     and     watershed
                                      management activities.
ESS     5     Land     Acquisition,  Applicable Project activities may restrict
Restrictions on Land Use and          access     to    gazetted      forests,     water
Involuntary Resettlement              catchments,      and   conservation         areas,
                                      thereby affecting community livelihoods.
                                      The       Process      Framework           applies
                                      paragraphs 2, 4, 21(d), 35(b), and Annex
                                      1 of ESS5 to ensure that restrictions are
                                      managed through participatory processes
                                      and      that   affected      persons      receive
                                      appropriate     assistance      for     livelihood
                                      restoration.     Where        MCs/VMGs           are
                                      affected, FPIC procedures under ESS7 will
                                      ensure culturally appropriate consultation
                                      and consent.
ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation  The project focuses on watershed and

                                                                                              27
ESSs Applicable by                       Its Relevance
the Project
and Sustainable Management of             landscape        restoration,    conservation       of
Living Natural Resources                  forests and wildlife habitats, and invasive
                                          species control. ESS6 ensures sustainable
                                          management              and      protection         of
                                          biodiversity and ecosystem functions.
ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-  Some                   project       watersheds           include
Saharan    African        Historically    MCs/VMGs with customary land/resource-
Underserved Traditional Local             use systems. ESS7 requires meaningful
Communities.                              engagement, respect for customary rights,
                                          differentiated support, and FPIC when
                                          significant impacts on land, resources, or
                                          cultural heritage occur. The PF works
                                          together with the IPPF to meet ESS7
                                          requirements.
ESS8           Cultural                   In each of the watersheds where this
Heritage                                  project will be implemented there are
                                          cultural and heritage sites and assets that
                                          will need to be managed in line with this
                                          standard.     ESS8       ensures     that    cultural
                                          heritage    is     identified,    protected,      and
                                          managed,          and     that     chance        finds
                                          procedures are applied
ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement  The Process Framework (PF) focuses on
and Information Disclosure                stakeholders        whose        livelihoods      and
                                          resource access are directly affected by
                                          project       interventions,         while        the
                                          Stakeholder        Engagement         Plan      (SEP)
                                          covers all affected and interested parties.
                                          Engagement under the PF will therefore
                                          be coordinated with the SEP to ensure
                                          consistency,        avoid       duplication,      and

                                                                                                   28
ESSs Applicable by                   Its Relevance
the Project
                                      minimize consultation fatigue. The PF will
                                      utilize   the     SEP’s    disclosure   channels,
                                      grievance        mechanisms,     and    feedback
                                      systems to strengthen participation and
                                      transparency.




    3. Implementing the process framework and collaborating
         organizations

The KEWASIP implementing and collaborating organizations are as shown in Table 3
below.
Table 3: KEWASIP Implementing and Collaborating Organizations
#        Organization         Role in the KEWASIP & Conservation Work
         IMPLEMENTING ORGANIZATIONS
    1.   Ministry of          Conservation        policy     formulation      and    project
         Environment,         coordination.
         Climate Change and
         Forestry
    2.   State Department     Overall coordination and fiduciary responsibility for
         for Forestry         the project.
    3.   Kenya Forest Service Management           of     gazetted     forests      including
                              indigenous forest protection and conservation,
                              plantation        tree     planting    and      management,
                              monitoring, and coordination for forestry resources.
                              Will    coordinate        forest   rehabilitation/restoration
                              works, and protection.
    4.   Kenya Wildlife       Conservation         and     management         of     wildlife.
         Service              Administers national parks and game reserves.


    5.   Kenya Forestry       Conducts research in forestry and allied natural

                                                                                             29
#        Organization         Role in the KEWASIP & Conservation Work
         Research Institute   resources. The institute has an obligation to
                              generate and promote improved technologies for
                              sustainable     management,         conservation       and
                              development of forests. It will support KEWASIP
                              with the latest germplasm and related technologies
                              for forests restoration.
    6.   Water Resources      The Water Resources Authority (WRA) is mandated,
         Authority            on behalf of the National Government to regulate
                              the management and use of water resources across
                              the country. The authority will support KEWASIP in
                              regulating water extraction from gazetted forests
                              are well as leading in water sources restoration,
                              conservation, and protection.
    7.   National             Development     and     implementation      of     Riparian
         Environment          Reserve Regulations and Wetland Management
         Management           Plans in critical wetland ecosystem management.
         Authority
    8.   State Department     Development of water harvesting structures and
         for Irrigation       farmer-led irrigation development.
    9.   National             Support the development and implementation of an
         Environment Trust    incentive and award schemes for shared ecosystem
         Fund                 value and resource mobilization.
    10. State Department      Development of conservancy management plans,
         for Wildlife         restoration of green corridors, management of
                              invasive species, and promoting human wildlife co-
                              existence.
    11. Council of            The CoG will support KEWASIP in coordinating
         Governors            aspects of the project that are devolved such as
                              water    conservation      and    supply,   with    county
                              governments     to    assure      county    governments’
                              participation   and     support    of   relevant    project
                              activities.


                                                                                        30
   4. Policy, Legal and Regulatory Frameworks

   4.1    Introduction

The Government of Kenya (GoK) has a historical commitment to environmental
conservation with a focus on forests and wildlife because of the centrality of tourism
in the country’s economy. This commitment is anchored in the enactment and
implementation of national laws, and formulation and implementation of policies that
promote and facilitate conservation efforts. Internationally, a number of ratifications
regarding environment and wildlife protection, and conservation have been made
including international treaties. Article 2(6) of the Constitution of Kenya provides that
“any treaty or convention ratified by Kenya shall form part of the law of Kenya under
this Constitution”. Therefore, ratification of international Treaties incoporates those
treaties and conventions into Kenya Law, and the same are implemented and
enforced as if they were locally enacted. Relevant policies, laws and international
treaties for the KEWASIP are presented in the tables below. The use of this Process
Framework will be guided by the said policies and laws.



   4.2    Applicable National Policies, Legal and Regulatory Frameworks

The Table below presents the provisions of applicable policies, legal and regulatory
frameworks including their relevance to the Project.


Table 4: Applicable National Legal, Policy, and Regulatory Framework.
 Law                  Key Provisions                                Relevance
 Land Act, 2012       Provides for the administration,              Applicable because
 (Revised Edition     management and registration                   project interventions
 2019)/ Land          management of public, community and           must respect tenure
 Registration Act,    private land, and procedures for land         rights and avoid
 2012                 acquisition.                                  physical displacement.
                                                                    Where land-use
                                                                    restrictions affect
                                                                    livelihoods, mitigation
                                                                    will follow the Process
                                                                    Framework and ESS5


                                                                                       31
Law                 Key Provisions                               Relevance
                                                                 requirements.
Occupational        Ensures safety, health, and welfare of       Applicable to all
Safety and Health   workers in workplaces.                       KEWASIP activities
Act, 2007                                                        involving construction,
                                                                 restoration, or physical
                                                                 works. Contractors and
                                                                 implementing partners
                                                                 will comply with
                                                                 national OHS standards
                                                                 and ESS2 requirements.
National Gender     Establishes the Commission to promote        upports KEWASIP’s
and Equality        gender equality and freedom from             gender mainstreaming
Commission Act,     discrimination for all persons.              and inclusion
2011                                                             objectives, ensuring
                                                                 that women, youth,
                                                                 and VMGs are
                                                                 meaningfully
                                                                 represented in decision-
                                                                 making and project
                                                                 benefits.
National Land       Gives effect to the objects and principles   Guides its operations in
Commission Act      of devolved government in land               relations to land
2012 (Revised       management and administration, and for       management and
2016)               connected purposes.                          administration.
Community Land      Provides for the recognition, protection,    KEWASIP project will
Act 2016            and registration of community land rights;   reference this Act in the
                    management and administration of             event of acquisition of
                    community land.                              community land for
                                                                 water reservoirs for
                                                                 example.
EMCA Act, 1999      Establishes the legal framework for          Guides environmental
(Amended 2015)      environmental protection and                 and social screening of


                                                                                     32
Law                Key Provisions                                Relevance
                   management through NEMA. Requires             KEWASIP activities
                   Environmental and Social Impact               under the ESMF. All
                   Assessments (ESIAs), audits, and permits      subprojects will comply
                   for projects with potential environmental     with EMCA
                   impacts.      Guides environmental and        requirements for ESIA,
                   social screening of KEWASIP activities        environmental permits,
                   under the ESMF. All subprojects will          and monitoring.
                   comply with EMCA requirements for ESIA,
                   environmental permits, and monitoring.
Water Act, 2016;   Provides for the management,                  Directly applicable to
Water Resources    conservation, and control of water            watershed and sub-
Management         resources through the Water Resources         catchment
Rules, 2007        Authority (WRA) and county-level water        management activities
                   service providers.                            under KEWASIP. All
                                                                 water abstraction,
                                                                 conservation, and
                                                                 restoration initiatives
                                                                 will align with WRA
                                                                 regulations and basin
                                                                 management plans.
Wildlife           Provides for conservation and                 Relevant for KEWASIP
Conservation and   management of wildlife, community             interventions in or near
Management Act,    participation, and benefit-sharing            protected areas. The
2013               mechanisms.                                   Project will promote
                                                                 human–wildlife
                                                                 coexistence, shared
                                                                 governance, and
                                                                 benefit-sharing
                                                                 consistent with this Act.
The Forest         Establishes the Kenya Forest Service          KEWASIP supports
Conservation and   (KFS) and provides for participatory forest   forest restoration and
Management Act,    management through Community Forest           sustainable forest use


                                                                                   33
Law                 Key Provisions                                 Relevance
2016 &              Associations (CFAs).                           through CFAs and
Amendment Act,                                                     Integrated Hydroshed
2021                                                               Committees (IHCs).
                                                                   Activities will comply
                                                                   with this Act and
                                                                   associated forest
                                                                   management
                                                                   guidelines.
Registration of     Provides for the registration of all           Useful acquiring for the
Documents Act       documents conferring, or purporting to         project registered and
CAP 285 (revised    confer, declare, limit, or extinguish any      non-registered land.
in 2020)            right, title, or interest, whether vested or
                    contingent to, in or over immovable.
Physical and Land   Provides for the planning, use, regulation,    Guides development of
Use Planning Act,   and development of land and for                buildings and other
2019                connected purposes.                            infrastructure on land
                                                                   under the various
                                                                   jurisdictions.
County              Provides for devolution, county planning,      Guides collaboration
Governments Act,    and citizen participation in local             with county
2012 (Amended       governance.                                    governments in
2020)                                                              implementing the PF
                                                                   and ensures alignment
                                                                   with County Integrated
                                                                   Development Plans
                                                                   (CIDPs) and local
                                                                   development priorities.
The Law of          Provides for formal transfer of short-term     Applicable in the
Contract 2012       land rights.                                   signing of agreements
CAP 23                                                             and MOUs in relation to
                                                                   land documentation.
National Museums Provides that a monument or objects of            The Act will guide


                                                                                       34
Law                 Key Provisions                                 Relevance
and Heritage Act    archaeological, paleontological, or cultural   handling of any chance
Cap 216 Revised     interest discovered in a part of Kenya         finds of artefacts or
Edition 2012        shall be the property of the Government.       other archeological
(2006).                                                            items in the project
                                                                   footprint.
The Access to       Mandates project proponents to disclose        Prepare and implement
Information Act,    pertinent information to stakeholders          a SEP to guide
2016                during the project lifecycle.                  information disclosure
                                                                   to varied stakeholders.
Persons with        Provides for the rights, participation, and    Ensures accessibility
Disability Act,     inclusion of persons with disabilities in      and participation of
2025                social and economic activities.                persons with disabilities
                                                                   in PF consultations,
                                                                   livelihood activities, and
                                                                   grievance mechanisms.
Community           Provides a legal framework for the             Ensures accessibility
groups              registration, regulation and coordination      and participation of
registration Act,   of community-based organizations (CBOs)        persons with disabilities
2022                and special interest groups only.              in PF consultations,
                                                                   livelihood activities, and
                                                                   grievance mechanisms.
Children Act,2022   Section 55: Provides for the protection of     KEWASIP activities will
                    children against child labour and armed        ensure prevention and
                    conflict.                                      elimination of child
                                                                   labour
Land regulation     These Regulations implement provisions         Ensures clarity in
(2017)              of the Land Act, 2012, with respect to a       administration,
                    variety of matters including administration    conversion of land that
                    of public land and private land,               are likely to affect
                    conversion of freehold or leasehold            KEWASIP
                    tenure, compulsory acquisition,
                    settlement programs, easements and


                                                                                     35
  Law                 Key Provisions                                Relevance
                      analogous rights, and evictions from
                      unlawfully occupied public land.
  Land Registration   These Regulations of the Cabinet              Provides procedures for
  General             Secretary implement provisions of the         registration of land
  regulation (2017)   Land Registration Act in respect of the       acquired by the project
                      organization and administration of land       as per the Land Act
                      registries, the procedures for the            (2012).
                      registration of land, and related matters.
                      The land register referred to under
                      section 7 of the Act shall contain (a) the
                      property section; (b) the proprietorship
                      section; and (c) the encumbrance section.
                      The Regulations set out the content of
                      each section and of the proprietorship
                      section of a register, that pertains
                      community land.




Laws              Provisions                                                     Relevance
The physical      These regulations apply to all local physical and land      Facilitates
and Land Use      use development plans. It states that all sections,         coordination of
planning (Local   notices, or any other matter provided in the act shall      planning for
Physical and      be executed within the stipulated period, subject to        land use for
Land Use          any period of extension permissible under the act or        different
Development       any written law. It gives guidelines on the preparation     projects
Plan),            of the local physical and land use development plan,
Regulations       the approval process and amendment of revision
2020(Draft)       procedure.
Community         These Regulations of the Cabinet Secretary for Land         Operationalizes
Land Regulation   and Physical Planning implement provisions of the           recognition,
2017              Community Land Act, 2016 ("Act") with respect to,           protection, and
                  among other things, recognition, protection and             registration of


                                                                                         36
Laws             Provisions                                                    Relevance
                 registration of community land rights, community land      community land
                 management committees, registration of communities,        by setting
                 conversion of community land, settlement of disputes       procedures and
                 relating to community land, conversion of group            standards
                 representatives, a national program for public
                 education and awareness on provisions of the Act and
                 the rights of communities over community land within
                 twelve months of the commencement of these
                 Regulations.
Water Service    Enables operations regarding the provision of water        Sets guideline
(Regulatory)     services by water service boards and other operators       and standards
Rule 2012        or their agents. Each water service board shall apply to implementation
                 the Regulatory Board for the issuance of a license. The    of Water Act,
                 Board may issue a provisional license or a full license.   2012
                 For a full license, the water service board must be in
                 possession of water permits from identified sources
                 from the Water Resources Management Authority and
                 sewage discharge permits from the National
                 Environment Management Authority.
Water            These Regulations applies to (a) the policies, plans,      Provides
Harvesting and   programs and activities of the national government,        procedures and
Storage          county governments and entities of the national and        standards for
Regulation       county governments; and public and private                 implementation
(2021)           waterworks for water harvesting and storage,               of provisions
                 reservoirs for impounding surface run-off and for          Water
                 regulating stream flows to synchronize them with           Harvesting and
                 water demand patterns and structures and devices for       Storage
                 flood control and management. Part 1 gives the             Regulation Act
                 classification of storage dams and other waterworks,       (2021)
                 Part 3 outlines the development of waterworks, Part
                 IV outlines release of water from storage dams and
                 other waterworks: Part V outlines maintenance and


                                                                                      37
Laws              Provisions                                                   Relevance
                  management of water works. Part VIII outlines water
                  harvesting while Part X gives the general provisions.
Water             The rules sets the procedure for obtaining water use      Sets the
Resources         permit and the conditions placed on permit holders.       standards and
Management        Sections 54 to 69 of the Water Resources Management procedures to
Rules, 2007       Rules 2007 impose certain statutory requirements on       be followed in
                  dam owners and users in regard. Section 16 of the         the utilization of
                  Water Rules requires approval from the WRMA for a         water resources
                  variety of activities that affect the water resources,    including
                  including the storage of water in dams and pans.          abstraction
                  Approval by WRMA is conferred through a Water             controls, code
                  Permit. A permit is valid for five years and must be      of use and
                  renewed.                                                  responsibility in
                                                                            the protection
                  Section 104 of the Water Resource Management Rules        of the resource
                  requires certain water permit holders to pay water use    including
                  charges. The intention of the water use charges was       effluent
                  to raise revenue for water resource management, raise discharge.
                  revenue for catchment conservation activities, improve
                  efficiency of water resource abstraction and provide a
                  system of data collection on water resource usage.
Constitution of   Guarantees the right to a clean and healthy               Anchors
Kenya (2010)      environment (Article 42), public participation (Article   KEWASIP’s
                  10), equality and non-discrimination (Article 27), and    commitment to
                  protection of community land and natural resources        public
                  (Articles 60–63).                                         participation,
                                                                            inclusivity,
                                                                            environmental
                                                                            sustainability,
                                                                            and equitable
                                                                            access to
                                                                            natural


                                                                                       38
Laws               Provisions                                                   Relevance
                                                                             resources. All
                                                                             PF processes
                                                                             and grievance
                                                                             mechanisms
                                                                             are consistent
                                                                             with
                                                                             constitutional
                                                                             rights and
                                                                             principles.
National Land      Guides the country towards efficient, sustainable, and    Regulates to
Policy of (2009)   equitable use of land for prosperity and posterity.       how private
                                                                             land is used to
                                                                             protect the
                                                                             public interest.
Vision 2030 and    To transform Kenya into a newly industrializing,          Land is an
MTP II (The Big    middle-income country providing a high quality of life    enabler to
4 Agenda)          to all its citizens by 2030.                              achieve the
                                                                             objective of
                   Ensuring food security, affordable housing,               vision 2030.
                   manufacturing, and affordable Universal healthcare
                   (Big 4 Agenda).
The National       Provides legal, administrative, institutional, and        Guides the
Land Use Policy    technological framework for optimal utilization and       process of
(2017)             productivity of land related resources in a sustainable   registration of
                   and desirable manner.                                     land rights.
National           Provides the framework for an integrated approach to      Provides for
Environment        planning and sustainable management of natural            sustainable land
Policy (2014)      resources in the country.                                 management
National           Improved management of livestock for increased            The KEWASIP
Livestock Policy   production through improved management of                 will address
(2020)             livestock, feed and rangeland resources while             access to water
                   promoting social inclusion and environmental              for livestock


                                                                                     39
Laws              Provisions                                                Relevance
                  resilience.                                            and this Policy
                                                                         will come in
                                                                         handy.
National          Promote commercial and modern agricultural sector      This law relates
Agriculture       that sustainably support economic development in the   to water
Investment Plan   context of devolution.                                 extraction from
(2019-2024)                                                              protected areas
                                                                         for irrigated
                                                                         agriculture
                                                                         within adjacent
                                                                         communities.
Forest Policy     Provides a framework for improved forest governance,   Some of the
(2014)            resource allocation, partnerships and collaboration    project
                  with the state and non-state actors to enable the      activities may
                  sector to contribute to meeting the country’s growth   use forest
                  and poverty alleviation goals within a sustainable     resources for
                  environment.                                           laying water
                                                                         infrastructure
                                                                         (Weirs,
                                                                         reservoirs),
                                                                         thus requiring
                                                                         collaboration
Wildlife Policy   Provides a framework to perpetuity conserve Kenya's    Facilitates
(2020)            wildlife resources, as a national heritage; increase   collaboration
                  access, incentives, and sustainable use of wildlife    for effective
                  resources, while ensuring equitable sharing of         management
                  benefits.                                              human-wildlife
                                                                         conflicts in
                                                                         project sites
Water Policy      Provides for comprehensive management of the           This is a key
(1999)            problems of water and sanitation, adopts an integrated reference
                  approach to water resources management.                document for


                                                                                   40
Laws               Provisions                                                    Relevance
                                                                              the proposed
                                                                              project whose
                                                                              focus will be on
                                                                              natural
                                                                              resources
                                                                              restoration and
                                                                              conservation in
                                                                              protected
                                                                              areas.
Arid and Semi-     Provides for delicate balance between the quest for        This is a key
Arid Land Policy   rapid development and the need to maintain and             document for
2012               support the unique livelihoods system that best utilizes   the project
                   the variable ecological conditions of the region.          since its focus
                                                                              is on the ASALs
                                                                              where some of
                                                                              the watersheds
                                                                              are located.
Public Health      Provides for sanitation, disease prevention, and control   Relevant to
Act, 2012          of environmental health hazards.                           project
(Revised)                                                                     activities
                                                                              related to
                                                                              sanitation,
                                                                              waste
                                                                              management,
                                                                              and water
                                                                              quality. Ensures
                                                                              health
                                                                              protection of
                                                                              communities
                                                                              and workers
                                                                              during project
                                                                              implementation.


                                                                                        41
   4.3    Relevant International Treaties

At the regional and international levels, Kenya is a signatory to several protocols,
treaties and conventions. These have implications for KEWASIP, preparation of its
interventions and for their implementation. This Process Framework underscores the
importance of these regional and international obligations. These are summarized in
Table 5 below.


Table 5: Relevant International Treaties
Convention        or Brief Description
Treaty
The United Nations     The    Convention     on     Biological   Diversity   provides        a
Convention on          comprehensive framework for stopping biodiversity loss. It is a
Biological Diversity   carefully balanced, legally binding international treaty that
(1992)                 commits Parties to the triple objective outlined below:
                          The conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use
                           of its components; and
                          The fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the
                           utilization of genetic resources.
United Nations         The UNCCD is the legally binding international agreement
Convention to          linking environment and development to sustainable land
Combat                 management. It focuses on combating desertification, land
Desertification        degradation, and mitigating the effects of drought, particularly
(UNCCD)                in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas.
East African           Calls for exploitation of emerging environmental markets
Climate Change         through the design of favorable policy instruments.
Policy (2010)
East African           Sets out actions to ensure conservation and management of
Community Treaty       forests.
(1999)
International          Covenant guarantees a person’s right to social security,
Covenant on            adequate standard of living and family life. Adequate standards



                                                                                        42
Convention         or Brief Description
Treaty
Economic, Social        of living include adequate food, clothing and housing, and to
and Cultural Rights     the continuous improvement of living conditions.
(ICESCR) (1966)
Universal               The declaration in Article 6 and 7 provides for ensuring that
Declaration of          everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person
Human Rights            before the law and equal before the law and are entitled
(1948)                  without any discrimination to equal protection of the law.
                        Article 17 provides for security of property and declares that
                        no one shall be deprived of his/her property.
United Nations          Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples was signed to
Declaration on the      prohibit discrimination against indigenous peoples and to
Rights of               promote their full and effective participation in all matters that
Indigenous Peoples      concern them and their right to remain distinct and to pursue
(2007)                  their own visions of economic and social development.
ILO Convention on       In recognition of legacy issues identified in MCs/VMGs profiles
Indigenous and          and in line with Kenya’s legal framework and international
Tribal Peoples,         obligations (UNDRIP; ILO Convention 169), the Government of
1989 (No.169)           Kenya (GoK)       will   implement    a   prioritized,   participatory
                        approach to clarify, recognize and, where appropriate, remedy
                        historical VMG ownership and access claims. This will include
                        targeted socio-economic and customary tenure assessments,
                        participatory land and cultural mapping, and a legal review to
                        identify pathways for       recognition     or    remedy (including
                        community land registration, negotiated continued-access or
                        co-management agreements, and livelihood restoration or
                        compensation      where     justified).   All    measures    will    be
                        implemented in a culturally appropriate manner, applying FPIC-
                        consistent processes for VMGs and Indigenous Peoples as
                        required under ESS7, and will include transparent grievance
                        mechanisms and independent review options for legacy claims.




                                                                                            43
Convention   or Brief Description
Treaty




                                    44
Convention        or Brief Description
Treaty
United Nations         Sets out commitments for all parties including commitments
Framework              that relate to promoting sustainable management, and
Convention on          conservation and enhancement of sinks and reservoirs of all
Climate Change         GHGs.
(UNFCCC) (1992)
Paris Agreement        Under Article 5(2) of the Paris Agreement, it provides for
(2015)                 REDD+ which this project is built on.
Cancun agreements      GoK’s long-term aim of forest restoration and expansion is to
                       participate in the carbon market. Therefore, the KEWASIP is
                       geared up to that objective and is in that sense anchored in
                       the REDD+ is foundation provisions, in which case its
                       safeguards are to be respected and promoted by the country’s
                       legal framework. The Cancun safeguards are aimed at
                       protecting the integrity of the REDD+ program and protecting
                       the rights of indigenous peoples and local communities.




   5. Potential restrictions on access to natural resources and impacts on
         livelihoods

   5.1      Introduction

ESS5 of the ESF on Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use, and Involuntary
Resettlement is applicable to the project because of implementation of activities
under component 1 on establishing the groundwork for programmatic and sustained
investments in sustainable land and water management (SLWM) by enhancing the
capabilities of institutions and natural resources management governance structures
in Kenya; component 2 on supporting the restoration and management of degraded
landscapes through investment in selected watersheds and building resilient
livelihoods for the communities in the project areas, and component 3 that focuses
on ensuring the efficient consolidation of planning and budgeting processes,
alongside the diligent implementation and reporting of project activities in line with
the World Bank standards, through a strengthened National and County Project

                                                                                   45
Coordination Units. This Process Framework operationalizes the requirements of
ESS5 where KEWASIP activities may cause restrictions of access to natural resources
in protected forests, water catchments, or communal lands. In accordance with
paragraphs 2, 4, 21(d), and 35(b) and Annex 1 of the Standard, the PF establishes a
participatory process to:
(i) identify and engage affected communities, including Vulnerable and Marginalized
Groups (VMGs);
(ii) assess the scale and nature of impacts on livelihoods and resource use;
(iii) negotiate continued-access and co-management arrangements wherever
feasible;
(iv) agree on transparent and equitable mitigation or livelihood-restoration measures;
and
(v) monitor outcomes with full community participation.


The PF emphasizes avoidance of physical displacement; if restrictions result in
potential physical or significant economic displacement, a Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP) and/or Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP) will be prepared in line with the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The PF also integrates
ESS7 principles, ensuring Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) for VMGs where
their land or resource-use rights may be affected.

   5.2      Potential Social Impacts of KEWASIP

The development of this Process Framework is required under the Environmental
and Social Framework (ESF) for projects that may involve restrictions of access to
legally designated parks and protected areas, which could lead to adverse impacts
on the livelihoods of affected persons. The PF further recognizes the role of
MCs/VMGs and their customary governance structures in collaborative resource
management. These structures such as traditional councils, elders’ committees, or
VMG associations will be identified and included in co-management and decision-
making processes alongside other community groups. The Process Framework sets
out the participatory processes by which affected communities will be engaged, the
criteria for eligibility, and the measures to mitigate and manage potential livelihood
impacts. Under KEWASIP, the process framework is prepared because the enhanced
enforcement and boundary demarcation and maintenance activities that include

                                                                                   46
landscape restoration and enhanced protection to ensure regeneration, may restrict
community access to some forest-based and wildlife-based resources which could
result in adverse impacts on local community livelihoods. The core project activities
focus on promotion and expansion of the collaborative forest management and
community resource management aimed at providing legal access to specific forest
resources within protected areas to communities as members of Community Forest
Associations (CFAs), Water Resource Users Associations (WRUAs), Community-based
Organizations (CBOs), and other similar community groups under national law.


Table 6 below, presents a summary of some of the potential adverse social impacts
and proposed mitigation measures as related to restrictions of access to forests and
wildlife resources. The livelihood restoration measures considered issues including
but not limited to: (a) income levels of affected communities/persons, (b) other non-
monetary sources of livelihood, (c) constraints and opportunities for income
generation, (d) number of persons not able to revert to previous occupation, and (e)
existing skills and project preferences of affected persons.




                                                                                  47
Table 6: Potential Adverse Social Impacts arising from Access Restrictions to Resources and Proposed Mitigation
Measures
    “Mitigation measures in this table are illustrative. The actual scope of access restrictions will be determined during site-specific
screening and participatory Social Assessments. Mitigation will be tailored to the specific livelihood elements affected starting with
shared governance and continued access before introducing livelihood restoration or compensation options”.1

Component/Sub-                Proposed Project            Specific Project           Potential Negative          Proposed Mitigation
component                     Activities                  Activities of              Impacts                     Measures
                                                          Potential Concern
Component 1 – Roots of Resilience: Policy, Legal, and Regulatory Framework
Sub-component                 Develop Frameworks          (i)    Develop              Increased access             Involvement of local
1(a): Strengthening           and Guidelines for                 Frameworks and        restrictions to natural       community
watershed management Integrated SLWM                             Guidelines for        resources due to              organizations in
institutions, water           including Landscape,               Integrated SLWM       developed/reviewed            policy, legislation,
resources, and                Hydroshed plans, micro             including             and subsequent                plans and financing
watershed governance          catchment plans                    Landscape,            implementation of             to ensure that their
                              Cascading the                      Hydroshed plans,      policies, legislation,        access needs and
                              implementation of                  micro catchment       financing, and plans          rights are included
                              national policies and              plans                 for KEWASIP                   through sustainable


1
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project           Specific Project           Potential Negative          Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities                 Activities of              Impacts                     Measures
                                            Potential Concern
                 harmonization of the       (ii)    Cascading the       implementing entities          access and
                 conflicting county                 implementation      with an enforcement            management
                 policies and legislation           of national         mandate.                       programs.
                 on management of                   policies and        Risk of livestock            Undertaking of
                 watersheds and                     harmonization of    seizures                       targeted stakeholder
                 landscapes Develop /               the conflicting     Risk of sexual                engagements
                 review of national key             county policies     harassment and/or              throughout project
                 policies, legislation,             and legislation     assaults on herders            phases, as provided
                 strategies and                     on management       and other community            in the Project
                 standards and enhance              of watersheds       members seeking                Stakeholder
                 management of                      and landscapes      access to natural              Engagement Plan
                 watershed landscapes       (iii)   Develop / review    resources.                     (SEP).
                 and ecosystems                     of national key     Risk of physical/verbal      Re-training of
                 (i) Development of                 policies,           assaults, killings             enforcement officers
                    Matching grant                  legislation,        and/or forced                  on observance of
                    manual                          strategies and      disappearances of              human rights in
                 (ii) Develop, Review and           standards and       herders and                    resource-sharing,


                                                                                                                              49
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project            Specific Project         Potential Negative      Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities                  Activities of            Impacts                 Measures
                                             Potential Concern
                    Update Management              enhance             community members          protection and
                    Plans (SCMPs,                  management of       attempting to access       conservation.
                    PFMPs, WMPs,                   watershed           natural resources.        Appointment of
                    RMPs, Protected                landscapes and                                 social officers at all
                    Area Plans,                    ecosystems                                     KEWASIP
                    Conservancies Plans, (iv)      Development of                                 participating
                    etc.) for the targeted         Matching grant                                 watersheds to
                    watersheds                     manual                                         monitor compliance
                                             (v)   Develop, Review                                and offer training for
                                                   and Update                                     enforcement
                                                   Management                                     officers.
                                                   Plans (SCMPs,                                 Implementation of
                                                   PFMPs, WMPs,                                   workers GRMs with
                                                   RMPs, Protected                                representation from
                                                   Area Plans,                                    community
                                                   Conservancies                                  members and NGOs
                                                   Plans, etc.) for                               and CBOs to support


                                                                                                                           50
Component/Sub-           Proposed Project           Specific Project           Potential Negative        Proposed Mitigation
component                Activities                 Activities of              Impacts                   Measures
                                                    Potential Concern
                                                           the targeted                                     in the complaints
                                                           watersheds                                       management from
                                                                                                            communities.
Sub-component            (i) Develop and roll-out      Develop and roll-out   Enhanced restrictions     Livelihood options will
1(b): Development and       a monitoring and            a monitoring and       on access to natural      be identified jointly with
Implementation of           data sharing                data sharing           resources may             Project-Affected Persons
Integrated Watershed        framework                   framework              adversely affect          (PAPs) through
and Landscape            (ii) ICT and Monitoring       ICT and Monitoring     community livelihoods.    participatory feasibility
Restoration Monitoring      Infrastructure              Infrastructure         To mitigate these         studies to ensure
Systems                     improvement                 improvement            impacts, KEWASIP will     viability, market
                         (iii)Strengthen               Strengthen             support the               demand, and cultural
                            institutional and           institutional and      development of            acceptability before
                            technical capacities        technical capacities   alternative livelihoods   adoption. Results from
                            for implementation          for implementation     and enterprises such as   these studies will inform
                            of the (KEWASIP)            of the (KEWASIP)       tree nurseries.           the site-specific PF and
                            Project at county           Project at county                                the KEWASIP Grant
                            and community               and community          Exclusion of some         Manual.


                                                                                                                                     51
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project          Specific Project           Potential Negative      Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities                Activities of              Impacts                 Measures
                                           Potential Concern
                    levels                     levels                 community members
                 (iv)   Establish             Establish knowledge    including minorities,
                    knowledge hubs             hubs (serve as         vulnerable and
                    (serve as training         training centre and    marginalized groups
                    centre and                 monitoring centres -   PWDs and the aged
                    monitoring centres -       linkage with Maarifa   from knowledge and
                    linkage with Maarifa       Centre and             nature-based
                    Centre and                 Equipment for          enterprises.
                    Equipment for              County Model
                    County Model               Knowledge
                    Knowledge                  Management
                    Management                 Offices-Restoration
                    Offices-Restoration        focus)
                    focus)                    Train communities
                 (v) Train communities         on Land Restoration
                    on Land Restoration        best practices.
                    best practices.            including seed


                                                                                                                    52
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project            Specific Project          Potential Negative   Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities                  Activities of             Impacts              Measures
                                             Potential Concern
                     including seed              collection, tree
                     collection, tree            nursery
                     nursery                     establishment and
                     establishment and           management by
                     management by               KEFRI
                     KEFRI                      Capacity building
                 (vi)    Capacity building       programme for
                     programme for               watershed data
                     watershed data              collection and
                     collection and              conduct watershed
                     conduct watershed           monitoring at the
                     monitoring at the           County and
                     County and                  Community
                     Community                  Training of Farmer
                 (vii)   Training of             Field Schools
                     Farmer Field Schools        facilitators in the
                     facilitators in the         project counties on


                                                                                                                  53
Component/Sub-          Proposed Project             Specific Project            Potential Negative           Proposed Mitigation
component               Activities                   Activities of               Impacts                      Measures
                                                     Potential Concern
                           project counties on           aspects of Tree
                           aspects of Tree               nursery,
                           nursery,                      agroforestry, SLM
                           agroforestry, SLM             etc. by KFS
                           etc. by KFS
Sub-component 1(c): (i) Finalization of the             Finalization of the        Payment for                 Ensure full PF
Sustainable financing      National PES                  National PES                Ecosystem Services           participation in PES
mechanisms and             framework                     framework.                  (PES) will lead to           design, including
investments for         (ii) Design and develop         Institutionalize PES        commodification of           community mapping
watersheds and             the PES including             at National level.          these natural                of customary users,
landscapes                 the governance and           Undertake feasibility       services leading to          seasonal users,
management                 institutional                 studies to inform the       (a) exclusion of local       VMGs, forest-
                           structures (1 Carbon          design of 2 PES             communities from             dependent people,
                           Credit and 1 Water            Schemes for Chyulu          accessing services           and women.
                           Fund) for select              and Nyambene                due to inability to         Formulate PES rules
                           priority project area         Watersheds.                 pay, (b) increased           through documented
                        (iii)Undertake feasibility      Develop the PES             demand for land at           community


                                                                                                                                         54
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project           Specific Project            Potential Negative        Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities                 Activities of               Impacts                   Measures
                                            Potential Concern
                    studies to inform the       Governance and              higher costs which        agreements that
                    design of the PES           Institutional               may lead to               define continued
                    Schemes                     Structures.                 systematic                access, benefit-
                 (iv)   Provide seed               Operationalize          dispossession of          sharing formulas,
                    fund to                         two PES                 VMGs, (c) Risk of         and grievance
                    operationalize the              schemes.                exclusion of weaker       pathways.
                    payment of                     Institutional           community                Safeguard VMGs and
                    ecosystem services              Capacity Building       members including         poorer households
                    (Carbon Credit or               and Training on         the poorest and           by ensuring inclusive
                    Water Funds)                    PES concepts.           forest communities        eligibility criteria,
                    including                  Development of a            or IPs from               small-grant access,
                    undertaking of              Monitoring,                 participation in          and legal support
                    project registration        Reporting, and              natural resources         where necessary.
                    and certification           Verification (MRV)          management.              Establish
                    processes)                  system for the             Risk of livestock         transparent MRV
                 (v) Establish public           established PES             seizures                  systems accessible
                    private partnership         Schemes.                   Risk of sexual            to communities and


                                                                                                                              55
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project           Specific Project            Potential Negative         Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities                 Activities of               Impacts                    Measures
                                            Potential Concern
                     in PES                    Deliver institutional       assaults on herders        reviewed through PF
                 (vi)    Award and              capacity building           and other                  iterations.
                     recognize identified       and training for PES.       community                 Institute joint
                     best practices            Develop and                 members seeking            enforcement
                 (vii)   Provide small          implement an                access to resources.       mechanisms
                     grants to local            incentive and award        Risk of killings and       (community rangers,
                     community groups           scheme.                     forced                     CFAs, PES
                     to scale up their                                      disappearances of          committees) with
                     nature-based                                           herders and                human-rights
                     enterprises                                            community                  standards.
                                                                            members attempting        Provide human-
                                                                            to access resources.       rights and conflict-
                                                                                                       sensitivity training
                                                                                                       for all PES
                                                                                                       enforcement and
                                                                                                       monitoring officers.
                                                                                                      Deploy social


                                                                                                                              56
Component/Sub-      Proposed Project       Specific Project     Potential Negative          Proposed Mitigation
component           Activities             Activities of        Impacts                     Measures
                                           Potential Concern
                                                                                                officers to monitor
                                                                                                equity, reduce risks
                                                                                                of exclusion or
                                                                                                dispossession, and
                                                                                                support grievance
                                                                                                resolution.
                                                                                               Operate a robust
                                                                                                GRM with options
                                                                                                for third-party
                                                                                                review, community
                                                                                                observers, and
                                                                                                public disclosure of
                                                                                                outcomesSu
Component 2 – Green Horizons: Sustainable Landscape and Watershed Management
Sub-component       (i)   Soil and water      Soil and water      Limitations of access   •      Access
2(a): Sustainable         conservation         conservation         due to protection for   restrictions addressed
Landscape and             measures on          measures on          regeneration of         by CFAs agreements


                                                                                                                       57
Component/Sub-         Proposed Project           Specific Project            Potential Negative         Proposed Mitigation
component              Activities                 Activities of               Impacts                    Measures
                                                  Potential Concern
Watershed Management       community and              community and               restored areas, area   with the KFS.
in Private and             privately cultivated       privately cultivated        closure, and           •      Engage Project-
Community Lands            lands;                     lands;                      application of         Affected Persons (PAPs)
                       (ii) Gully rehabilitation;    Gully rehabilitation;       pesticides to tackle   through PF iterations—
                       (iii) Establishment of        Establishment of            invasive species.      beginning at screening
                           green corridors;           green corridors;           Risk of livestock      and continuing through
                       (iv) Area closure             Area closure                seizures               planning,
                           management and             management and             Risk of sexual         implementation, and
                           use;                       use;                        assaults on herders    monitoring. Each
                       (v) Establishment of          Enrichment of               and other              iteration documents
                           woodlots;                  degraded pasture            community              updated access rules,
                       (vi) Agroforestry in           and rangeland;              members seeking        livelihood measures,
                           productive                Control and                 access to resources.   and community
                           landscapes;                management of              Risk of killings and   feedback.
                       (vii) Enrichment of            invasive species            forced                 Engagement of local
                           degraded pasture           (such as Prosopis           disappearances of      communities through
                           and rangeland;             Juliflora and Lantana       herders and            their organizations,


                                                                                                                                   58
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project         Specific Project    Potential Negative       Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities               Activities of       Impacts                  Measures
                                          Potential Concern
                 (viii) Control and          camara).           community              such as CBOs, to
                      management of                             members attempting determine resource
                      invasive species                          to access resources.   access arrangements.
                      (such as Prosopis                                                •      Involvement of
                      Juliflora and                                                    community groups in
                      Lantana camara).                                                 ensuring resources
                                                                                       sharing.
                                                                                       •Instituting controlled
                                                                                       resource harvesting
                                                                                       plans for adjacent and
                                                                                       forest communities.
                                                                                       •      Re-training of
                                                                                       enforcement officers
                                                                                       (KFS and KWS) on
                                                                                       observance of human
                                                                                       rights in resource-
                                                                                       sharing, protection and


                                                                                                                 59
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project   Specific Project    Potential Negative   Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities         Activities of       Impacts              Measures
                                    Potential Concern
                                                                             conservation.
                                                                             •      Employment of
                                                                             social officers in all
                                                                             KEWASIP participating
                                                                             watersheds to monitor
                                                                             compliance and offer
                                                                             training for enforcement
                                                                             officers.
                                                                             Implementation of
                                                                             robust GRMs with
                                                                             representation from
                                                                             community members
                                                                             and organizations
                                                                             including NGOs to
                                                                             manage and process
                                                                             community complaints
                                                                             speedily.


                                                                                                      60
Component/Sub-         Proposed Project              Specific Project           Potential Negative          Proposed Mitigation
component              Activities                    Activities of              Impacts                     Measures
                                                     Potential Concern


Sub-component          (i)    Enhancing                 Enhancing                 Limitations of access      Co-management
2(b): Restoration of          collection, testing,       collection, testing,       due to protection for       and protection of
Gazetted Forests and          and distribution of        and distribution of        regeneration of             restored areas with
green corridors               quality tree seeds         quality tree seeds         restored areas,             community
                              and seedlings for          and seedlings for          application of              organizations, such
                              restoration of             restoration of             pesticides to tackle        as CBOs, alongside
                              degraded                   degraded                   invasive species, and       controlled access for
                              landscapes;                landscapes;                forest concessions.         resources.
                       (ii)   Expansion of              Expansion of              Risk of livestock           Involvement of
                              production capacity        production capacity        seizures                    community
                              of tree nurseries,         of tree nurseries,        Risk of sexual              organizations, such
                              planting and               planting and               assaults on herders         as CBOs, in planning
                              management of              management of              and other                   and implementing
                              seedlings for              seedlings for              community                   forest concessions
                              reforestation,             reforestation,             members seeking             to ensure their
                              natural                    natural                    access to resources.        access needs are


                                                                                                                                        61
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project              Specific Project          Potential Negative         Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities                    Activities of             Impacts                    Measures
                                               Potential Concern
                         regeneration,             regeneration,            Risk of killings and      taken care of.
                         development of            development of            forced                    -Develop joint
                         systems and               systems and               disappearances of         enforcement
                         procurement of            procurement of            herders and               protocols involving
                         equipment for             equipment for             community                 community rangers,
                         control and               control and               members attempting        CFAs, and agency
                         management of             management of tree        to access resources.      officers; hold
                         tree pests and            pests and diseases,                                 periodic dialogue
                         diseases, enhanced        enhanced fire                                       forums; provide
                         fire surveillance,        surveillance,                                       human-rights and
                         preparedness and          preparedness and                                    conflict-sensitivity
                         response                  response                                            training; and
                         mechanisms;               mechanisms;                                         institute transparent
                 (iii)   Establishment of         Establishment of                                    reporting of
                         demonstration sites       demonstration sites                                 enforcement actions
                 (iv)    Conduct National         Conduct National                                 -Re-training of
                         Forest Assessment         Forest Assessment                                enforcement officers


                                                                                                                               62
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project             Specific Project           Potential Negative   Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities                   Activities of              Impacts              Measures
                                              Potential Concern
                         (NFRA)                   (NFRA)                                      (KFS and KWS) on
                 (v)     Conservation of         Conservation of                             observance of human
                         threatened tree          threatened tree                             rights in resource-
                         species                  species                                     sharing, protection and
                 (vi)    Enhance                 Enhance                                     conservation.
                         rehabiltation,           rehabiltation,                              -Employment of social
                         restoration and          restoration and                             officers in all KEWASIP
                         conservation of          conservation of                             participating
                         public forests and       public forests and                          watersheds to monitor
                         gazetted water           gazetted water                              compliance and offer
                         towers, green            tower and green                             training for enforcement
                         corridors.               corridors.                                  officers.
                 (vii)   Promotion of            Construction of                                -Implementation of
                         agroforestry value       Infrastructure to                              robust GRMs with
                         chains                   facilitate wildlife                            representation from
                 (viii) Construction of           movement through                               community
                         Infrastructure to        green corridors e.g.                           members and


                                                                                                                        63
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project             Specific Project          Potential Negative      Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities                   Activities of             Impacts                 Measures
                                              Potential Concern
                        facilitate wildlife       water pans and                                  organizations
                        movement through          boreholes                                       including NGOs to
                        green corridors          Promotion of                                    manage and process
                        e.g. water pans           agroforestry value                              community
                        and boreholes.            chains                                          complaints speedily.
                 (ix)   Constructions of         Control and
                        water harvesting          management of
                        structures                invasive species;
                 (x)    Control and              TA for the
                        management of             development of
                        invasive species;         forest concessions.
                 (xi)   Enable and pilot
                        Public Private
                        Partnership’s
                        investment.


Component 3:     (i)    The establishment        The establishment     Limitations of access        Extend capacity


                                                                                                                         64
Component/Sub-        Proposed Project           Specific Project            Potential Negative       Proposed Mitigation
component             Activities                 Activities of               Impacts                  Measures
                                                 Potential Concern
Project                    and                       and operationalizing    due to the enhanced           building to
Management,                operationalizing of       of all project          capacity of                   community
Training & Capacity        all project               governance              enforcement/protection        organizations,
Building                   governance                structures or           agencies such as KFS          such as CBOs, to
                           structures or             organs;                 and KWS through the           enhance their
                           organs;                  Project monitoring      project.                      capacity to
                      (ii) Project monitoring        and evaluation;                                       negotiate with
                           and evaluation;          Environmental and                                     protection
                      (iii) Environmental and        Social Safeguard                                      agencies (KFS
                           Social Safeguard          Management                                            and KWS) and
                           Management               Institutional support                                 to participate
                      (iv) Institutional             including                                             effectively in
                           support including         procurement of                                        resource
                           procurement of            vehicles and                                          management
                           vehicles and              requisite equipment                                   through
                           requisite                 (computers,                                           sustainable
                           equipment                 printers, etc.).                                      access based in


                                                                                                                              65
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project          Specific Project           Potential Negative   Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities                Activities of              Impacts              Measures
                                           Potential Concern
                     (computers,              Capacity building of                              part on self-
                     printers, etc.).          project staff on                                  regulation.
                 (v) Capacity building         aspects of                                       Integrate PF
                     of project staff on       procurement,                                      requirements
                     aspects of                budgeting,                                        into training for
                     procurement,              reporting, and                                    all project staff,
                     budgeting,                monitoring of                                     ensuring they
                     reporting, and            activities.                                       understand
                     monitoring of                                                               participatory
                     activities.                                                                 planning, access
                                                                                                 rights, livelihood
                                                                                                 restoration, and
                                                                                                 documentation
                                                                                                 standards.
                                                                                                Ensure
                                                                                                 enforcement
                                                                                                 agencies


                                                                                                                      66
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project   Specific Project    Potential Negative   Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities         Activities of       Impacts              Measures
                                    Potential Concern
                                                                                   participate in
                                                                                   joint training
                                                                                   with
                                                                                   communities to
                                                                                   promote
                                                                                   cooperation and
                                                                                   reduce conflict.
                                                                                  Ensure
                                                                                   monitoring
                                                                                   systems include
                                                                                   PAP participation
                                                                                   through
                                                                                   community-
                                                                                   based
                                                                                   monitoring,
                                                                                   feedback loops,
                                                                                   and public


                                                                                                       67
Component/Sub-   Proposed Project   Specific Project    Potential Negative   Proposed Mitigation
component        Activities         Activities of       Impacts              Measures
                                    Potential Concern
                                                                                  reporting.




                                                                                                   68
   5.3    Livelihood Restrictions

Restrictions on land use, access to resources, and livelihoods under KEWASIP will be
guided by the continued enforcement of laws and regulations by protection agencies,
including the Kenya Forest Service (KFS) and the Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS),
relating to forest and wildlife protection. While such restrictions are necessary for
conservation, they may create livelihood challenges for communities living in or
adjacent to protected areas.


The PF recognizes that these restrictions can disproportionately affect vulnerable and
marginalized groups (VMGs) whose participation in decision-making processes is
often limited. For example, Community Forest Associations (CFAs) are formed within
a 5 km radius of forests, which may exclude minority and marginalized populations
living beyond this catchment. KEWASIP will therefore apply measures consistent with
ESS7, including differentiated engagement strategies, targeted outreach, and Free,
Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) for Indigenous Peoples. Specific actions will
include mapping and identifying VMGs, ensuring their meaningful participation in
consultations and planning processes, and safeguarding their inclusion in benefit-
sharing mechanisms.


The restrictions on access are expected to be reinforced as KEWASIP supports the
review and development of policies, legislation, and management plans. County
governments will also support protection and conservation through their mandates in
natural resource management, community engagement, provision of extension
services, and integration of conservation priorities into County Integrated
Development Plans (CIDPs). The PF process including screening, site-specific plans,
and livelihood restoration measures will be aligned with County Integrated
Development Plans (CIDPs) and other sectoral plans (e.g., Forest and Water
Management Plans). Alignment ensures county ownership, budget integration, and
consistency of objectives. Project resources will further strengthen the institutional
capacity of KFS and KWS in planning, monitoring, and enforcement, while also



                                                                                   69
supporting alternative livelihood activities to reduce community dependence on
gazetted forests.


The types of livelihoods that may be affected by access restrictions include:
   i.     Pastoralist livelihoods – reduced access to water, pasture, and fodder,
          especially during droughts, which may heighten tensions and competition
          over scarce resources.
  ii.     Agriculture-based livelihoods – restricted access to irrigation water and
          water for livestock.
 iii.     Traditional medicine-based livelihoods – limited access to herbs and
          wildlife products used in healing practices.
 iv.      Hunting and gathering livelihoods – reduced access to fruits, honey,
          berries, vegetables, and bushmeat used for household sustenance.
  v.      Wood carving livelihoods – limited access to wood materials, affecting a
          value chain that includes artisans, traders, packers, and transporters.
 vi.      Charcoal and fuelwood-based livelihoods – disruption of fuelwood and
          charcoal value chains that support small businesses (e.g., food vendors, fish
          fryers), urban informal settlements, and transporters.
 vii.     Water vending livelihoods – restricted extraction of water from gazetted
          forests, affecting vendors who supply domestic users and small-scale farmers.


To address these risks, the PF adopts the following measures:
        a. Use of Force
   i.     Enforcement of access restrictions adheres to the principle of minimum force.
  ii.     Protection agencies and supporting law enforcement actors prioritize
          awareness creation, community dialogue, and mediation as the first response
          to non-compliance.
 iii.     Rules governing access to protected areas are clarified and agreed with
          stakeholders to minimize ambiguity and prevent conflict.


        b. Incident Reporting and Management




                                                                                     70
 i.      The NPCU, through Social Development Focal Points (SDFPs), operationalizes
         an incident reporting protocol.
ii.      Reportable incidents include excessive use of force, violent confrontations,
         seizures or destruction of property, escalated human–wildlife conflict, or other
         project-related social risks.
iii.     Serious incidents are reported to the World Bank within 48 hours.
iv.      Monitoring identifies any increase in frequency, range, or severity of incidents
         linked to project activities.
 v.      The NPCU verifies and confirms implementation of corrective and follow-up
         actions before closure of any incident.


       c. Stakeholder Engagement
 i.      Stakeholder engagement occurs in two tiers:
            o   Primary stakeholders: directly affected communities, CFAs, WRUAs,
                VMGs and IPs.
            o   Secondary      stakeholders:     county     governments,   civil      society
                organizations, research institutions, and other interested parties.
ii.      Engagement includes consultations, participatory planning, decision-making,
         and disclosure of information in accessible formats and languages.
iii.     The PF and the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) are harmonized to avoid
         duplication, with the SEP remaining a living document subject to updates as
         required.


       d. Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs)
 i.      Indigenous Peoples are engaged in accordance with ESS7, including obtaining
         Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC).
ii.      Differentiated consultation strategies ensure meaningful participation of VMGs,
         including women, youth, migrants, forest dwellers, and forest-dependent
         households.
iii.     Targeted measures guarantee their equitable access to benefits, grievance
         redress, and livelihood restoration initiatives.




                                                                                          71
The Process Framework (PF) and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
will clearly distinguish between Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs) covered
under ESS7 and other excluded or vulnerable groups addressed under ESS1. For
VMGs and Indigenous Peoples, engagement will follow culturally appropriate
consultation and Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) procedures consistent
with UNDRIP, ILO 169, and ESS7, recognizing collective rights and customary
governance institutions. For other excluded or vulnerable groups (such as poor
households, women-headed households, youth, or persons with disabilities), the PF
will ensure inclusion through targeted outreach, livelihood support, and equitable
benefit access. Differentiating these groups ensures that rights, options, and support
measures reflect their distinct legal status and cultural contexts


   e. Monitoring, Legacy Issues, and Conflict Prevention
The Process Framework recognizes that some communities particularly MCs/VMGs
may face legacy land and resource-access issues arising from historical designations
of protected areas, forest reserves, or previous projects. During screening and site-
specific social assessments, the Project will identify any prior uncompensated
restrictions or displacement linked to areas targeted for KEWASIP investments.
Verified cases will be addressed through a dedicated legacy-claims pathway
established under this PF and described in Table 5, allowing affected VMGs and
households to seek remedy through recognition of access rights, co-management or
continued-use agreements, or livelihood restoration consistent with ESS5 and ESS7.
Where claims cannot be resolved administratively, the PF will facilitate referral to
legally mandated bodies such as the National Land Commission or Alternative
Dispute Resolution (ADR) mechanisms.


   f. Proactive Monitoring and Conflict Prevention
Monitoring and conflict prevention under the PF will not rely solely on the Grievance
Redress Mechanism (GRM). In addition to handling complaints, the Project will take
proactive measures to anticipate and address potential sources of conflict early.
These include: (i) regular participatory monitoring of access restrictions and
livelihood outcomes; (ii) periodic social-tension assessments at watershed and


                                                                                   72
county levels; (iii) joint review forums bringing together communities, County Project
Coordination Units (CPCUs), and implementing agencies to identify and resolve
emerging issues; and (iv) continuous community sensitization on access rules,
benefit-sharing, and grievance procedures. This proactive approach will help
maintain transparency, trust, and early resolution of concerns before they escalate
into formal grievance.


All outcomes will be documented and disclosed as part of the PF’s monitoring and
reporting process.
  i.    The PF acknowledges historical challenges in forest and wildlife management,
        including human–wildlife conflict, disputes over boundary demarcation, limited
        recognition of customary rights, resettlement and displacement, and
        allegations of past violence.
 ii.    KEWASIP applies conflict-sensitive approaches and due diligence to prevent
        recurrence of historical injustices.
 iii.   Strengthened grievance redress mechanisms and community-level conflict
        resolution address grievances linked to legacy issues.
 iv.    Continuous dialogue is maintained with affected communities to build trust
        and ensure equitable participation in project benefits.


All of the above commitments shall be implemented in close coordination with the
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) established for KEWASIP. The GRM, through its
community, county, and national-level committees, will provide accessible and timely
channels for receiving, processing, and resolving grievances arising from livelihood
restrictions, use of force, incidents, or legacy concerns. This system will ensure
transparency, accountability, and early resolution of disputes, while feeding into the
incident reporting protocol for cases requiring escalation to the World Bank. The
GRM will thus serve as the central structure for monitoring, managing, and
responding to social risks during project implementation.




                                                                                   73
   6. Eligibility and measures for mitigation for affected communities

   6.1    Mitigation Measures

This section presents the framework for mitigating adverse impacts that may result
from restrictions of access to natural resources. In line with ESS5, KEWASIP will not
finance or support any activities that involve physical displacement, land acquisition,
or resettlement. The PF therefore focuses exclusively on managing access
restrictions that may lead to economic and livelihood impacts on Project-Affected
Persons (PAPs). Mitigation will follow ESS5 principles: avoiding access restrictions
where possible; minimizing their duration and severity; and ensuring that any
unavoidable impacts are addressed through participatory and culturally appropriate
livelihood restoration, benefit-sharing, access agreements, and compensation
measures, as applicable. Mitigation measures will be defined through PF iterations at
watershed and site level, jointly with PAPs, VMGs, and community organizations. All
measures will specifically include differentiated support for marginalized and
vulnerable groups (ESS7), and respect traditional governance systems, customary
tenure, and resource-use practices.



   6.2    Application of ESS5 & ESS7
ESS5 applies to KEWASIP where project activities may introduce temporary or
permanent restrictions on access to land and natural resources that result in
economic displacement. For this Project, ESS5 is applied exclusively to access
restrictions and not to land acquisition or physical displacement, which are not
permitted under KEWASIP. Access restrictions covered under this PF include:
• Limitations on customary or seasonal use of forests, grazing areas, water points,
and other shared natural resources;
• Changes in resource governance rules that affect PAPs’ livelihoods;
• Establishment or strengthening of protected or regulated areas where communities
hold customary or recognizable usage rights.


In accordance with ESS5 Annex 1, mitigation will be based on:
(i) A site-specific Social Assessment;


                                                                                    74
(ii) A land and resource-use inventory;
(iii) Full participation of all resource users; and
(iv) Negotiated and documented agreements on access rules, mitigation, governance,
and livelihood restoration.


ESS7 applies because some KEWASIP watersheds include VMGs/MCs with distinct
cultural identities, customary governance systems, or collective attachment to land
and natural resources. Measures under this PF will therefore ensure:
• Meaningful participation of VMGs/MCs in all PF processes;
• Differentiated support to address unique vulnerabilities;
• Recognition of customary resource-use systems and governance structures;
• Application of FPIC where project impacts may:
  – restrict customary land or resource use,
  – affect cultural heritage or,
  – generate significant livelihood impacts.
FPIC will follow the process and requirements defined in the IPPF and will be
undertaken prior to finalizing any activity that may significantly affect VMG.
Together, the provisions of ESS5 and ESS7 will guide the PF to ensure that
restrictions on land use and access to natural resources are managed in a way that
is lawful, inclusive, and sensitive to the rights and vulnerabilities of all affected
groups.


The KEWASIP may be confronted with unsettled/multiple claims of access
restrictions to resources in the various watersheds. It is also possible that protection
agencies may heighten restrictions           to ensure less impact      at sub-project
commencement and implementation. At the commencement of the project,
documentation of any anticipated restrictions and potential human rights concerns
will be undertaken. This will help identify and address related grievances early,
thereby preventing the escalation of conflicts that may otherwise arise during project
implementation. During implementation, some watersheds may have complex or
overlapping customary claims to resources. The Project will document any existing
or anticipated access restrictions and associated human rights concerns as part of


                                                                                     75
the site-specific Social Assessment. No agency will impose new restrictions
unilaterally; all restrictions must be agreed through PF iterations with affected
communities. Only economic displacement resulting from access restrictions is
permitted under KEWASIP. If any proposed activity is found, through the Social
Assessment or PF consultations, to involve physical displacement or non-mitigable
impacts on VMGs or cultural heritage, such activity will not be supported by the
Project. Where significant impacts on VMGs’ customary resource use are expected,
the FPIC process described in the IPPF will be followed prior to approval of the
activity.


    6.3      Consultations with Communities in the Project Areas
 i. Consultation and Participation (FPIC)
The Process Framework (PF) adopts the provisions of Free, Prior and Informed
Consent (FPIC) in full alignment with the Marginalized Communities Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF) and ESS7. The FPIC process will be applied where project
activities may affect the lands, territories, or natural resources traditionally owned,
used, or occupied by Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs). The PF
emphasizes that VMGs will not be excluded from KEWASIP if they express concerns
about pre-selected activities. Instead, the Project will engage in constructive
dialogue with VMG leaders and communities to identify feasible, culturally
appropriate, and mutually acceptable investment options in their areas. This
participatory process will ensure that project benefits are accessible to all, and that
FPIC outcomes reflect genuine agreement rather than withdrawal or exclusion.


The Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) process under KEWASIP will follow the
principles and procedures outlined in the Marginalized Communities Planning
Framework (MCPF) and ESS7. The PF applies these principles through the following
key steps:
(i) Screening: Early identification of the presence of Marginalized Communities &
Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs) in or near project sites using the criteria
in the IPPF.




                                                                                    76
(ii) Information disclosure: Provision of accurate, relevant, and culturally appropriate
information on proposed project activities, potential risks, and benefits in local
languages and through trusted communication channels.
(iii) Consultation and deliberation: Adequate time and space for MCs/VMGs to
discuss proposed activities internally, with their traditional governance structures and
representatives.
(iv) Negotiation and agreement: Joint development of feasible and culturally
acceptable project options or modifications that reflect VMG priorities and concerns.
(vi)   Documentation and disclosure: Preparation and public disclosure of signed
       FPIC outcomes and agreements, including how community inputs are
       reflected in project design.


All project activities in areas where Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs) are
present will begin with a screening and impact assessment to determine whether the
proposed activity may cause: (i) impacts on land and natural resources subject to
traditional ownership or customary use, (ii) relocation of VMGs from those lands, or
(iii) significant impacts on cultural heritage. Where any of these apply, FPIC will be
required.
If impacts do not trigger FPIC, the project will still undertake Free, Prior and
Informed Consultation to ensure broad community support. In all cases, the
consultation or consent process will be designed and agreed with VMG
representatives themselves, using culturally appropriate methods, languages, and
governance structures. The process and outcomes including whether consent was
required, how it was sought, and the results achieved will be documented and
disclosed as part of the site-specific Social Assessment and PF Implementation Plan.


This FPIC process will ensure that consent where required under ESS7 is obtained
through a transparent, inclusive, and verifiable process. Detailed templates,
documentation formats, and procedural guidance are provided in the marginalized
Communities Planning Framework (IPPF), Section 5.2, which shall be read in
conjunction with this PF. Prior to finalization, this Process Framework (PF) will




                                                                                     77
undergo additional disclosure and consultation with a broad range of stakeholders at
national, county, and community levels to ensure inclusiveness and ownership.


For implementation, each site or investment that may involve access restrictions will
be preceded by a Social Assessment (SA) and Land-Use Inventory. These studies will
identify all categories of resource users customary and statutory rights-holders,
seasonal users, women, youth, pastoralists, and Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups
MCs/VMGs     and    map    the   natural-resource    base   and    existing   governance
arrangements.


The findings of the SA will inform preparation of a Site-Specific Process Framework
Implementation Plan (PFIP). Each PFIP will be developed through a participatory
process agreed with all resource users and will:
• define and document negotiated access restrictions and resource-governance
arrangements;
• identify feasible and equitable livelihood-restoration and benefit-sharing measures;
and
• specify institutional roles, timelines, and monitoring indicators.


These site-specific PFIPs will serve as the operational instruments linking community
participation, mitigation measures, and the broader KEWASIP environmental and
social management system. Screening criteria and the unit of management (sub-
catchment, community, or protected block) will follow the guidance provided in the
ESMF and Grant Manual to ensure consistency across project areas.


   ii.    Consultation with Other Project-Affected Communities
In addition to Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) procedures for Vulnerable
and Marginalized Groups (VMGs), the Project will ensure inclusive and meaningful
consultation with all other project-affected and interested communities in accordance
with ESS10. Consultations will begin during project identification and continue
throughout design, implementation, and monitoring.




                                                                                     78
They will:
• be undertaken in accessible venues and languages, providing sufficient notice and
information on proposed activities, potential risks, and mitigation options;
• include representatives of women, youth, persons with disabilities, land-use right-
holders, seasonal users, and local institutions such as CFAs, WRUAs, and CIGs;
• use participatory tools (community mapping, focus-group discussions, barazas, and
household interviews) to identify livelihood and access impacts; and
• document community inputs and incorporate agreed actions into site-specific PF
Implementation Plans and local Grant Manuals.


The outcomes of these consultations will be publicly disclosed in summary form
within the community and at county level, ensuring transparency and continued
feedback.


Consultations during KEWASIP Preparation
The consultation process undertaken during KEWASIP preparation is considered
sufficient and robust, having engaged a wide range of stakeholders across
different counties and resource-use groups. A total of eleven (11) key informants
were interviewed face-to-face and through mailed questionnaires between February
27th and March 31st, 2025.


Separate Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) were conducted with men and women at
Nyambene Hills and Kibwezi (Chyullu Hills) on 27th and 28th February 2025,
respectively. Additional community engagements were conducted in Kwale on 28th
November 2024 (Annex 6) and in Makueni at Kambu Lutheran Church Hall on 26th
November 2024 (Annex 7). County officials from Makueni and Taita Taveta were also
consulted on 20th November 2024 (Annex 8).


Overall, 202 stakeholders participated, including 116 men and 86 women, with
representation from persons living with disabilities. These engagements provided
adequate information on local priorities, land and resource use patterns, access
challenges, governance concerns, and expectations regarding livelihood support. The


                                                                                  79
diversity and coverage of the consultations ensure that the PF reflects the concerns
of a broad cross-section of communities and institutions in the targeted watersheds.
The PF further requires that site-specific PF Action Plans be prepared for each
watershed, sub-watershed, or investment area where access restrictions or
management changes are proposed. These Action Plans will only be finalized after
completion of the required Social Assessment and Land & Resource Use
Census/Inventory for the specific site. Each Action Plan will:
• Describe the screening outcome and the scope of any proposed restrictions;
• Present the findings of the Social Assessment (including identification of PAPs and
VMGs) and the resource-use inventory;
• Document the participatory PF Iterations held with all resource users and
summarize the negotiated access rules, governance arrangements, livelihood
restoration measures, benefit-sharing arrangements, and monitoring indicators;
• Include an implementation schedule, roles and responsibilities, budget breakdown
(with unit costs), and contingency provisions;
• Specify disclosure arrangements (local channels and online) and the process for
obtaining final validation by affected communities prior to implementation.


No activity that limits access to land or natural resources will commence without a
site-specific PF Action Plan that demonstrates adequate assessment, consensus-
seeking PF Iterations, and documented community agreements consistent with ESS5
and ESS7.

Consultations during Implementation

The KEWASIP will adopt comprehensive consultation and stakeholder engagement
across all watersheds where the Project will be implemented. These consultations
will be consistent with this Process Framework (PF). Where MCs/VMGs are present,
KEWASIP will first make a determination—consistent with ESS7 on whether Consent
is required or whether broad community support through Free, Prior and Informed
Consultation is adequate. This determination will be made before consultations begin,
and the full process for achieving consent or broad community support will be
developed with VMGs to ensure cultural appropriateness and legitimacy.



                                                                                  80
All consultation outcomes will be disclosed to participants in accessible formats,
including barazas, local noticeboards, and translated summaries. These outcomes
will be integrated into PF Action Plans, LRPs, access arrangements, and governance
measures.


A Social Assessment (SA) is mandatory for every site or investment area where
KEWASIP activities may cause access restrictions or livelihood impacts. SA
requirements apply regardless of whether VMGs are present. No triage system will
be used to bypass SA requirements.


Participation in project implementation will be defined only through PF Iterations,
ensuring PAPs determine their roles. VMG governance structures (e.g., traditional
councils, elders, women’s groups, youth structures, and PWD groups) will be
included in all decision-making processes. Identification of PAPs will be conducted
through the SA, resource-use census, and participatory mapping based on inclusive
criteria that ensure representation of customary, seasonal, informal, women, youth,
pastoralist, and VMG user groups.


At least two rounds of public consultations will be conducted during project
preparation. The first meeting will introduce proposed KEWASIP activities,
anticipated impacts, and possible mitigation measures. The second meeting, held
after completion of the SA, will validate findings, review mitigation plans, and
confirm community support prior to implementation.


Notices for consultations will be issued jointly by the NPCU and CPCUs. Notices will
target households in and around the project area; CFAs and WRUAs; women, youth,
the elderly, and persons with disabilities; and other resource-dependent groups such
as pastoralists, fisherfolk, and smallholder farmers.


Consultations will be held in local languages, at accessible venues, using
participatory methods such as community mapping, focus group discussions, and
public barazas. Community leaders including chiefs, elders, MCs/VMG representatives,


                                                                                 81
and    local    associations   will   be   invited   to   present   views,   concerns,   and
recommendations.


The Grievance Mechanism will be accessible and culturally appropriate, integrating
traditional conflict resolution structures where possible. Outcomes of consultations,
grievances, and corrective actions will be documented in periodic monitoring reports
and disclosed locally.


Before any activity that may introduce access restrictions, a Site-Specific PF Action
Plan will be prepared. Each Action Plan will: (i) define proposed restrictions; (ii)
summarize SA findings; (iii) document PF Iterations; (iv) include negotiated access
rules and governance measures; (v) present a livelihood restoration package; (vi)
outline roles, responsibilities, timelines, and budgets; and (vii) establish disclosure
and validation procedures. No works will begin without an approved site-specific PF
Action Plan.
Consultation will continue throughout project implementation and will be monitored
through participatory mechanisms described in Section 5.6.




   iii.      Eligibility Criteria for Affected Persons and Communities

In line with ESS5, eligibility for assistance under the KEWASIP Process Framework
(PF) will be determined by the nature and severity of livelihood and access impacts
experienced as a result of project activities not by predefined categories or activity
types. Any person or group whose access to natural resources or ecosystem services
is adversely affected by KEWASIP interventions will be considered eligible for support
and assistance proportionate to the degree of impact.


The ESS5 classifies eligibility for those affected persons by involuntary resettlement
into three categories, those:
  i.      Those who have formal legal rights to land or assets;
 ii.      Those who do not have formal legal rights to land or assets, but have a claim
          to land or assets that is recognized or recognizable under national law; or

                                                                                         82
 iii.   Those who have no recognizable legal right or claim to the land or assets they
        occupy or use including those relying on access to natural resources for their
        livelihoods. .


The KEWASIP’s National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) will work primarily with
the respective Watershed-level/County Project Coordination Units (CPCUs) and the
identified community organizations including CFAs, CBOs, and relevant NGOs to
facilitate the participation of local stakeholders in defining assistance needs and
verifying eligibility. A participatory working committee with representation from
network of community organizations, minorities and marginalized groups through
their respective association or cooperatives and representative NGOs, project
implementation units at the national and watershed levels will be established to
develop the eligibility criteria for assistance. The criteria developed must be
approved by the National and Watershed-level Project Coordination Units which also
include various stakeholders. Those eligible for assistance must be directly affected
by the project activities based on their use and access of the respective watershed
ecosystem services and resources.


Eligibility verification will be based on findings from Social Assessments (SAs) and
site-specific Process Framework Implementation Plans (PFIPs). These instruments
will identify all affected persons, describe their use and access to the relevant
watershed ecosystem services, and assess the severity and duration of impacts. Due
consideration will be given to longstanding traditional use and customary access
within the respective watersheds. Verification of such use may involve the Kenya
Forest Service (KFS), Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS), CFAs, WRUAs, and other
conservation partners that maintain oversight of resource access and user rights.


The resulting eligibility and assessment criteria will ensure that all directly affected
persons particularly resource-dependent groups such as pastoralists, fisherfolk,
smallholder farmers, and MCs/VMGs receive appropriate and equitable livelihood-
restoration and benefit-sharing support.




                                                                                     83
      6.4   Proposed Measures to Assist Affected Persons and Communities

  The measures to assist affected persons and communities depends on the nature of
  the loss, expected loss, degree of access restrictions, the location, available
  alternatives and opportunities suitable to specific watershed benefiting all targeted
  beneficiaries. This is due to the diverse conditions across watersheds and adjacent
  communities, which require tailored approaches to ensure equitable benefits for all
  targeted groups. A fundamental objective of this Process Framework is to ensure
  that persons and communities affected by access restrictions to forests and wildlife
  resources define and undertake measures to improve (or at minimum restore)
  incomes, livelihoods and living standards, had there been no restrictions. This
  objective ensures that the extent of mitigation measures is commensurate with the
  extent of loss of access to resources due to restrictions. This also ensures that those
  who are affected more severely are assisted to a greater extent than those who
  incur smaller losses.


  While agencies such as the Kenya Forest Service (KFS) and the Kenya Wildlife
  Service (KWS) have a central role in enforcement and protection within KEWASIP, it
  is recognized that the enforcement of access restrictions is sensitive and may give
  rise to grievances. To strengthen accountability, this Process Framework (PF)
  provides for the establishment and operationalization of a robust Grievance Redress
  Mechanism (GRM). The GRM will serve as an impartial platform through which
  affected communities can raise concerns, seek redress, and obtain timely and
  transparent resolutions.
  Specific measures to mitigate impacts arising from access restrictions, applicable to
  each watershed. These should include the following, among others:
i.    Prioritize local community members for employment opportunities in activities
      within the protected areas, such as restoration planting, soil conservation efforts,
      removal of invasive species, and infrastructure construction;
ii.   Provide capacity building and training to CFAs, CBOs, NGOs, community
      committees, women and youth groups, elders’ groups in sustainable use and
      monitoring of forests and wildlife resources, including protection, preservation,
      conservation,   reforestation,   tourism   management,      business   enterprises,


                                                                                       84
        agriculture practices, fire management, wood harvesting and other community
        profitable ventures based on identified restrictions and needs Training will
        consider resource availability and the viability of proposed activities, and will
        cover protection, preservation, conservation, reforestation, tourism management,
        enterprise development, agriculture practices, fire management, wood harvesting,
        and other community-beneficial ventures aligned with identified needs.. ;
 iii.   Minimize conflicts between communities and protection agencies resulting from
        human-wildlife conflicts, by using deterrents for animals (particularly with hippos
        and elephants) such as fences, trenches, chili plants and bee hives to prevent
        animals   from   destroying   communities’    crops   introduce    monitoring   and
        compensation measures consistent with national wildlife policy ;
 iv.    Ensure clearly visible demarcation of National Park, Wildlife Reserve, and Forest
        Reserve boundaries in sensitive areas based on community-agreed boundaries,
        validated through participatory mapping and consultations. The PF will show
        current boundary status, describe the scale of any proposed adjustment, and
        ensure community-agreed boundaries validated through participatory mapping
        during site-specific PFIPs;
  v.    Promote establishment of sustainable household woodlots to progressively
        reduce pressure on forest resources;
 vi.    Provide alternative livelihood support such as collection of Non-Timber Forest
        Products including mushrooms, medicinal plants, wild fruits, and beekeeping to
        local communities around forest and forest reserves. These activities shall align
        with the KEWASIP Grants Manual, which details eligibility, implementation, and
        benefit-sharing procedures. Future revisions of the Grants Manual will integrate
        all community agreements and commitments captured in this PF to ensure
        community ownership and avoid top-down prescriptions;
vii.    Engage communities in new business opportunities in alignment to the Matching
        Grants Manual and ensure that project-supported enterprises are designed jointly
        with communities. Integration will only occur where such initiatives align with
        KEWASIP objectives and have community endorsement;
viii.   Through new or old collaboration between wildlife and forest authorities, and
        communities, define modes of beneficiary engagement;


                                                                                        85
 ix.    Use both new and existing collaboration mechanisms to identify training gaps,
        determine appropriate training modes, integrate operational human rights
        standards and procedures, support product development, and strengthen
        engagement with other stakeholders;
  x.    Conduct project awareness-raising campaigns for local communities, with clearly
        defined content, communication channels, and implementation approaches to
        ensure consistency across watersheds;
 xi.    Disaggregate training and capacity-building programs by purpose:(a) Community
        engagement and participatory governance; (b) Livelihood restoration and
        enterprise management (c) Enforcement and human rights awareness; and (d)
        Environmental and social safeguards.
xii.    Training curricula will be co-developed with County departments and community
        institutions to ensure relevance, inclusivity, and impact.;
xiii.   Conduct continuous project engagement and awareness programs for local
        communities, which include consultation, agreement validation, and structured
        feedback sessions. These programs will promote understanding of KEWASIP
        activities, foster community partnerships, and ensure that concerns and feedback
        are integrated into implementation;
xiv.    Awareness campaigns will be defined and included in project implementation.
        They will outline clear objectives, target groups, delivery methods (e.g., barazas,
        radio, posters, schools, social media), and monitoring approaches to ensure
        effectiveness, sustainability, and consistency across watersheds; and,
xv.     Ensuring participation of communities in the demarcation of boundaries and
        fencing construction.



        6.5    Considerations for Minorities and Marginalized Groups

    The World Bank ESF’s ESS7 and the Constitution of Kenya identifies Minorities and
    Marginalized Groups in Kenya. These Minorities and Marginalized Groups (MMGs)
    may require tailor-made targeting during consultation and communication processes.
    Efforts such as holding group consultation meetings related to mitigation activities
    are one way in which vulnerable individuals may be integrated into the consultation
    process. In particular, such an approach is useful for consulting with women in

                                                                                        86
coastal and northern Kenya communities where women might not have a traditional
role in decision-making or in voicing opinions in public sessions. In trying to identify
representatives of vulnerable groups in a community, it may also be useful to engage
community representatives to identify vulnerable persons for participation. Processes
should seek to engage vulnerable people at all stages of activity planning, and
ensure monitoring is in place to demonstrate involvement.


There are other minorities and marginalized groups apart from those recognized in
the Kenyan Constitution 2010 and the World Bank ESS7. The elderly among forest
dwellers and adjacent communities are likely to be particularly vulnerable as they
are often more heavily dependent on forest resources and have less diversified
income sources. In many watersheds the elderly are also the herbal medicine
experts relying heavily on forest and wildlife products in their practice and will be
affected by restrictions. They are also less able to take up alternative livelihood
activities as they are not likely to have the requisite skill sets, aptitude, and energy
for innovation.


Similarly, there are poorer community members who depend on well-connected
larger extractors for access to forest resources such as fuelwood and charcoal. They
often live in small shanties or urban centers near forests. Most are squatters on road
reserves or on the forest edges. If these larger extractors experience a decline in
income as a consequence of the restrictions brought about by the project, they may
demand more on payment from the poorer community members or not supply them
with necessities such fuelwood and charcoal. Also, there are many poorer
community members who access forests to collect basics such as wild vegetables,
mushrooms and insects mainly for subsistence purposes and restrictions imposed on
their access to forests for food may have severe consequences on their livelihoods.


Though limited, there are female community members who depend on forests for
firewood and food products who may also be negatively affected. Besides actively
extracting resources from forests, women from local communities are often involved
in processing and selling wild game meat, honey, mushrooms and insects locally, and


                                                                                     87
managing their household finances. Their dependence on forests for income
exacerbates their vulnerability if they experience reduction in available forest
products resulting from access restrictions imposed by the management agencies
such as the Kenya Forest Service (KFS), Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS), or County
Governments.


In order to ensure that the negative effects on minorities and marginalized groups
are minimized if not avoided, the KEWASIP will ensure they have access to project
related information including livelihoods assistance and that alternative livelihood
activities undertaken in communities will ensure their inclusion and participation. To
ensure women participate in the project, livelihoods support will be directed towards
the affected household rather than just the affected forest dweller or community
member. Women will be able to apply for alternative livelihood assistance that they
lead and manage. The project’s livelihood assistance efforts in each watershed will
be overseen by Community Grants Committees, which will continuously monitor the
implementation of activities, utilization of resources, achievement of outputs, and
overall progress to facilitate timely remedial actions.


   6.6    Livelihood Restoration
All mitigation measures under this Process Framework shall incorporate Livelihood
Restoration Plans whenever access restrictions cause economic impacts on
households or communities. Each plan will specify restoration targets, responsible
institutions, implementation timelines, and measurable indicators, consistent with
ESS5 paragraphs 2, 4, 21(d), and 35(b). Livelihood restoration strategies will be
developed through participatory consultations with Project-Affected Persons (PAPs)
and Minority Communities / Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (MCs/VMGs) to
ensure that affected livelihoods are improved—or at least restored—to pre-project
levels. Restoration options may include capacity building, alternative income-
generation activities, or access to community grants depending on local needs and
preferences.


   6.7    Monitoring of Participation


                                                                                   88
The Project will monitor and verify that Project-Affected Persons (PAPs) and
community representatives actively participate in all planning, decision-making, and
monitoring processes provided for in this Process Framework. Verification will use
attendance records, consultation minutes, participatory monitoring scorecards, and
independent audits. County Project Coordination Units (CPCUs) will compile quarterly
participation reports and submit them to the National Project Coordination Unit
(NPCU) for consolidation, disclosure, and adaptive management.



   6.8       Community Grants Committees (CGCs)
Each watershed will establish a Community Grants Committee (CGC) to oversee the
design, approval, and monitoring of livelihood-assistance grants financed under
KEWASIP. The CGCs will comprise representatives of Project-Affected Persons (PAPs),
Minority Communities / Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (MCs/VMGs), women,
youth, and local institutions such as Community Forest Associations (CFAs), Water
Resource Users Associations (WRUAs), and Common Interest Groups (CIGs).


The composition, roles, and decision-making procedures of each CGC will be
determined through participatory community consultations and validated by the
respective    County   Project   Coordination   Unit   (CPCU)   to   ensure   inclusivity,
transparency, and accountability. The Project will disclose information on the
membership and operating procedures of each CGC to the affected communities,
and the Committees’ terms of reference will require formal community agreement
before approval.


The functions of CGCs including grant appraisal, approval, monitoring, and reporting
are elaborated in the KEWASIP Grants Manual, which will remain aligned with this
Process Framework and with the provisions outlined under Section 2.2.4 (Community
Level) of the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).




                                                                                      89
   7. The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
   7.1    Introduction

The World Bank Environmental and Social Standard 10 (ESS10) requires all Bank-
financed projects to establish clear, accessible, and inclusive mechanisms for
receiving and addressing grievances related to project interventions. One of the key
objectives of ESS10 is to ensure that Project-Affected Persons (PAPs) have equitable
means to raise concerns, seek clarification, and receive timely, fair, and
proportionate responses.


The KEWASIP Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) forms part of a broader conflict-
prevention and resolution framework. The GRM will not only handle complaints but
also serve as a platform for communities to air concerns, seek information, and offer
feedback. All inquiries including complaints, comments, compliments, and requests
for information will be formally registered, acknowledged, and tracked to closure.


A Social Conflict Analysis (SCA) conducted during project preparation identified
potential triggers of local tension, including boundary disputes, access restrictions,
and competing resource claims. Findings from the SCA have been integrated into
this Process Framework to inform conflict prevention, risk mitigation, and grievance-
handling procedures.


The Project will prioritize early engagement, dialogue, and mediation as the first line
of response, with the GRM serving as a final recourse when preventive measures at
the community and watershed levels have been exhausted. Implementing partners
including the Kenya Forest Service (KFS), Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS), County
Governments, and community institutions will adopt clear enforcement and
engagement     protocols   emphasizing    lawful,   proportionate,   and   non-violent
approaches. All project and enforcement staff will receive training in conflict-
sensitive practices, human rights awareness, and de-escalation techniques.


The developed KEWASIP GRM is be accessible, gender-responsive, and culturally
appropriate, enabling all affected persons including Minority Communities and


                                                                                     90
   Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (MCs/VMGs) to submit grievances safely and
   without fear of retaliation. The GRM will operate transparently, ensuring all cases are
   acknowledged, recorded, investigated, resolved, and communicated in writing to the
   complainant in a language they understand.


   A stand-alone Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) developed for the project
   complement this PF by providing detailed procedural guidance on grievance handling,
   classification, recordkeeping, triage, appeals, and reporting. This section outlines
   how these procedures will be applied specifically to grievances arising from access
   restrictions and related project impacts.



       7.2   The Grievance Redress Mechanism and Process

   There are a number of aspects that potentially could contribute to a dispute or
   conflict which could be localized and unique to each specific watershed. Therefore,
   the means of resolving such disputes and conflicts are not necessarily uniform. What
   is important is the use of locally appropriate dispute and conflict settlement
   mechanisms agreeable to all parties concerned. Such mechanisms include the use of:
 i.    Local influential opinion leaders such as religious leaders, cultural/traditional
       leaders, elders, civil society organizations, political leaders and government
       agencies such as NGAO;
ii.    The Community Forest Associations (CFAs), Water Resource Users’ Associations
       (WRUAs), Community-based Organizations (CBOs) or similar community-based
       participatory natural resource management structures;
iii.   County Environmental Committees; and
iv.    Local Wildlife Clubs or natural resource committees.




   The selection and vetting of these mechanisms will be carried out transparently
   through community consultations. Their legitimacy will be based on inclusivity,
   fairness, and respect for community norms. Project management will recognize and
   abide by their resolutions when mutually agreed and in line with Kenyan law. Where
   disputes remain unresolved, decisions may be appealed through the formal GRM

                                                                                       91
process, ensuring escalation options remain available. Selected mediators or
committees will receive training and logistical support from the Project to strengthen
their capacity in grievance handling and conflict resolution.


In this PF, the following key elements are proposed to guide the resolution of
disputes and conflicts:
   i.   Clearly define the rights, responsibilities, remedies and compensation options
        for all stakeholders at the start of project activities, ensuring that each party
        understands entitlements, obligations, and grievance pathways.
  ii.   Outline the roles and accountability of each party involved, including
        Community Forest Associations, project staff, County governments, and
        independent organizations, ensuring these roles are reflected in formal
        agreements.
 iii.   Identify potential mediators and define conditions for mediation, including
        when mediation is appropriate, how mediators are nominated or elected,
        whether their decisions are binding, and how costs are covered.
 iv.    Use participatory community mapping and planning sessions to identify
        potential conflict areas and agree on mitigation actions early.
  v.    Establish procedures and timelines for implementing corrective actions and
        providing feedback and resolutions to complainants and affected stakeholders
        to ensure transparency and accountability.
 vi.    Define and disclose the specific functions of community, county, and national-
        level grievance committees, including oversight, reporting, and coordination
        responsibilities ensuring the active inclusion of women, youth, and
        marginalized groups to represent all community voices.
vii.    Expand grievance intake categories to include complaints, concerns,
        compliments, and information requests. Each submission will be logged,
        screened, and directed to the appropriate resolution level.
viii.   Create structured pathways for unresolved grievances at the community level
        to be escalated to the next level committees and, if necessary, to the NPCU as
        needed.




                                                                                      92
 ix.   Ensure all grievances and their resolutions are formally recorded and
       communicated to complainants and relevant stakeholders with regular
       reporting to the National Project Coordination Unit to maintain accountability.
 x.    Provide training for grievance committees to strengthen their skills in conflict
       resolution, effective grievance handling, and community engagement.
 xi.   Promote fairness and confidence in the GRM through independent third-party
       review options (e.g., Ombudsman or judicial recourse) available at no cost to
       PAPs. All agreements and resolutions must be reasonable, fair, and
       transparent.


Although the settlement of disputes and conflicts is expected to be managed
primarily within the project structures, this does not replace existing legal processes.
Dispute and conflict resolution should be based on consensus and guided by facts,
which will serve as the basis for any actions taken. The procedures must be inclusive,
culturally relevant, and participatory, aiming to facilitate communication between
conflicting parties, promote dialogue, and reach reasonable agreements. Efforts
should be made to resolve issues promptly to ensure timely access to entitlements
or settlements, thereby minimizing the need for costly and time-consuming legal
actions that could disrupt project implementation. The GRM will operate in
compliance with ESS10 and in coordination with the Stakeholder Engagement Plan
(SEP). ESS10 obligations apply primarily to Project implementers and contractors,
who must maintain open communication with PAPs and ensure that all grievances
are resolved through agreed procedures.


   8. Institutional and implementation arrangements for process
       framework

   8.1    Introduction

Establishing clear institutional roles and responsibilities is essential to ensure that the
Process Framework (PF) is effectively implemented in line with the requirements of
ESS5 and ESS7 of the World Bank Environmental and Social Framework. The PF
implementation focuses on managing restrictions of access to natural resources,
facilitating community engagement and Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC),

                                                                                        93
preparing and executing livelihood restoration and resource access agreements, and
ensuring effective monitoring, grievance redress, and reporting.


Implementation of this PF will build upon the existing KEWASIP institutional
architecture, but will introduce dedicated coordination, oversight, and technical
support roles at national, county, and community levels that specifically address PF-
related processes.


The Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Forestry (MoECCF), through the
State Department for Forestry (SDF), will lead and coordinate PF implementation.
Other key institutions include the Kenya Forest Service (KFS), Kenya Wildlife Service
(KWS), Water Resources Authority (WRA), Kenya Forestry Research Institute (KEFRI),
National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), County Governments, and
community-level organizations such as Community Forest Associations (CFAs), Water
Resource Users Associations (WRUAs), and Community-Based Organizations (CBOs).


Each of these institutions will play a distinct role in planning, implementing,
monitoring, and reporting PF activities, including community engagement, socio-
economic assessments, access agreements, and livelihood restoration actions.

    8.2    Institutional Responsibilities for the Process Framework
           Implementation

This section describes how the PF will be implemented by outlining their specific
functions, indicative budget, coordination mechanisms, and accountability lines.
PF implementation will follow a participatory process that ensures affected
communities, including MCs/VMGs are fully engaged throughout all stages:


  i.    Screening and Impact Identification

 ii.    Socio-Economic and Livelihood Assessment

 iii.   Community Engagement and FPIC

 iv.    Development of Livelihood Restoration / Access Plans



                                                                                   94
 v.     Implementation and Monitoring

 vi.    Independent Audits and Evaluation


The PF is a living document; therefore, institutional roles may evolve as project
implementation advances and as new stakeholders are identified.


Table 9: Institutional Responsibilities for the PF Implementation
S/N    Institution    Roles and Responsibilities                         Estimated Cost Sourc
o.                                                                       (USD)              e
                                                                                            Fund
     1. Ministry of  Provide strategic direction and monitor             35,000      (PF       IDA
       Environm        overall implementation of the PF.                  oversight:            (E&
       ent,            Overall supervision of the PF                     15,000;               S)
       Climate         Engagement of SEA-SH consultant.                  audits:               bud
       Change          Participate    in the watershed level             10,000;               get
       and             meetings to plan and implement PF                  capacity
       Forestry,       recommended activities and actions.                building:
       State           Coordinate with        other       Government     10,000)
       Departme        Line       Departments        for      ensuring
       nt        of    effective delivery of mitigation.
       Foresty         Make       budgetary        provisions     for
       NPCU            implementation of project activities.
                       Provide       technical      support       for
                       implementation          of      the     project
                       activities.
                       Oversee overall implementation and
                       monitoring of       E&S      mitigation    and
                       management           activities,       compile
                       progress        reports         from      local
                       levels/subprojects, and report to the
                       World Bank on biannual basis.
                       Train national and county level staff


                                                                                                     95
S/N    Institution    Roles and Responsibilities                               Estimated Cost Sourc
o.                                                                             (USD)               e
                                                                                                   Fund
                       and       contractors         who         will    be
                       responsible for implementing this PF.
                       Promptly notify the World Bank of any
                       incident or accident related to the
                       Project with significant adverse effects,
                       including SEA/SH cases and other
                       human rights violations.
                       Develop and operationalize the project
                       Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM),
                       ensuring          complaint        lodging       and
                       feedback channels are functional.
                       Carry out mid-term and closeout E&S
                       compliance         audits     of    the      Project
                       including the implementation of this PF.
     2. State          Involvement         in     activities      to    be  8000(technic         
       Departme        implemented          by     KEWASIP          around      al      support;
       nt       for    gazetted          forests      and         adjacent      reporting;
       Irrigation      communities.                                             field
                       Implementation of KEWASIP mitigation                    engagement)
                       measures including implementation of
                       access-restriction           mitigation          and
                       livelihood restoration measures under
                       this      PF.Producing        regular        activity
                       reports to feed into the project level
                       monitoring and evaluation system.
                       Assist      in      resolving        complaints
                       specifically reported to it or to GRMs in
                       which it participates
3      Kenya           Involvement         in     activities      to    be  12,000(com           


                                                                                                       96
S/N   Institution   Roles and Responsibilities                            Estimated Cost Sourc
o.                                                                        (USD)          e
                                                                                         Fund
      Forest            implemented       by     KEWASIP       in   and    munity
      Service           around gazetted forests and adjacent               agreements:
                        communities.                                       5,000;
                        Implementation            of      KEWASIP         monitoring:
                         mitigation           measures      including      4,000;
                         implementation of mitigation and                  training:
                         livelihood       restoration      measures        3,000)
                         agreed         through      PF     site-level
                         processes
                     Supervision        of    Participatory    Forest
                        Management plans and reporting to
                        PCU or State Department for Forestry.
                     Producing regular activity reports to
                        feed into the project level monitoring
                        and evaluation system.
                     Assist       in     resolving       complaints
                        specifically reported to it or to GRMs in
                        which it participates.
4     Water             SCMP implementation, resource-use  10,000                       IDA
      Resources          monitoring, grievance follow-up                   (SCMP
      Authority      Involvement in activities (relating to               monitoring:
                        water management and extraction) to                6,000;
                        be implemented by KEWASIP in and                   community
                        around gazetted forests and adjacent               engagement:
                        communities.                                       3,000;
                     Implementation of KEWASIP mitigation                 reporting:
                        measures         including        restriction-     1,000)
                        associated        displacement          impact
                        management and livelihood restoration


                                                                                             97
S/N   Institution   Roles and Responsibilities                          Estimated Cost Sourc
o.                                                                      (USD)             e
                                                                                          Fund
                     action under this PF and related
                     documents.
                     Supervision         of         sub-catchment
                     management plans and reporting to
                     PCU or State Department for Forestry.
                     Producing regular activity reports to
                     feed into the project level monitoring
                     and evaluation system.
                     Assist     in      resolving        complaints
                     specifically reported to it or to GRMs in
                     which it participates.
5     Kenya          Involvement in green corridors and                  10,000             IDA
      Wildlife       human-wildlife            conflict    activities      (HWC
      Service        (relating to wildlife and related NR                  mitigation:
                     management and conservation) to be                    6,000;
                     implemented         by     KEWASIP      around        community
                     gazetted         forests      and      adjacent       engageme
                     communities.                                          nt:   2,000;
                     Support enforcement of jointly agreed                reporting:
                     access rules under PF community                       2,000).
                     agreements.Implementation                    of
                     KEWASIP            mitigation         measures
                     including                restriction-associated
                     displacement impact management and
                     livelihood restoration action under this
                     PF and related documents.
                     Supervision of plans and reporting to
                     PCU or State Department for Forestry.
                     Producing regular activity reports to


                                                                                               98
S/N   Institution   Roles and Responsibilities                          Estimated Cost Sourc
o.                                                                      (USD)              e
                                                                                           Fund
                        feed into the project level monitoring
                        and evaluation system.
                     Assist       in    resolving       complaints
                        specifically reported to it or to GRMs in
                        which it participates.
6     Kenya             Tree nursery support, seed centres,  8,000(trainin                IDA
      Forest             agroforestry     training,      restoration     g:       4,000;
      Research           monitoring ;                                    community
      Institute      Implementation of KEWASIP mitigation               support:
                        measures        including        restriction-    2,000;
                        associated      displacement         impact      monitoring:
                        management and livelihood restoration            2,000)
                        action under this PF and related
                        documents especially NR enterprises
                        such as tree nurseries;
                     Supervision of plans and reporting to
                        PCU or State Department for Forestry;
                     Producing regular activity reports to
                        feed into the project level monitoring
                        and evaluation system.
                     Assist       in    resolving       complaints
                        specifically reported to it or to GRMs in
                        which it participates.
7
7     County            Screening,       FPIC        consultations,     24,000               ID
      Governme           preparation of PF Action Plans, field                                 A
      nts                monitoring,                    allowances,                            (E
                         reportingRespective           participating                           &S
                         counties will support activities under                                )


                                                                                               99
S/N   Institution   Roles and Responsibilities                           Estimated Cost Sourc
o.                                                                       (USD)          e
                                                                                        Fund
                          this PF such as public participation                              bu
                          and    information        disclosure,   and                       dg
                          licensing        KEWASIP           initiated                      et
                          enterprises          under        livelihood
                          restoration actions.
                     Participation in KEWASIP monitoring
                        activities.
8     Project        Participating       in    consultations     and  5000             IDA
      Affected          communication related to this PF;
      Persons,       Identifying        project       impacts    and
      and               alternative livelihood options;
      Communit       Participating in monitoring activities;
      ies            Implementation of project activities at
      Communit          community level
      y              May be engaged to participate in the                             
      Organizati        process to support implementation.
      ons         –  Will be the bases for community
      NGOs,             engagement, public participation, and
      CFAs,             FPIC as appropriate.
      WRUAs,
      CBOs, etc.
9     National           Provide      approvals     for   PF-related  5000             IDA
      Environm            activities    requiring      environmental      (compliance
      ental               assessment, and monitor compliance              audits;
      Managem             with ESS5/ESS7 mitigation measures              monitoring)
      ent
      Authority
      (NEMA)
10    Communit       Will       support       implementation      of  4000 Monitor  IDA


                                                                                            100
S/N   Institution   Roles and Responsibilities                       Estimated Cost Sourc
o.                                                                   (USD)          e
                                                                                    Fund
      y   grants     community-level PF actions, subject to           grant use
      committee      validation by PAPs during PF iterations.
                     Committee composition and TORs shall
                     be agreed with communities as part of
                     PF       implementation.            ensuring
                     participatory    decision-making        and
                     accountability in grant use, monitors
                     progress and compliance, and links
                     community structures with county and
                     national project institutions
11    Contingen                                      Covers           14,800        IDA
      cy (10 %                                       unanticip
                                                     ated/unf
                                                     orseen
                                                     PF needs
                                                     such       as
                                                     extended
                                                     consultat
                                                     ions,
                                                     additiona
                                                     l       FPIC
                                                     steps,
                                                     conflict
                                                     resolutio
                                                     n
                                                     processe
                                                     s,         or
                                                     livelihood
                                                     plan


                                                                                        101
S/N    Institution   Roles and Responsibilities                Estimated Cost Sourc
o.                                                             (USD)            e
                                                                                Fund
                                                   revisions
 Total Budget 156,800 USD




     9. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements

     9.1   Introduction

The purpose of M&E of Process Frameworks is to determine effectiveness of
implementation including the process of restrictions, progress of implementation of
mitigation measures including alternative livelihoods and livelihood restoration
actions, the disbursement of assistance to vulnerable groups, the effectiveness of
public consultation and participation activities, and the sustainability of livelihood
restoration and development efforts among the PAPs and affected communities.
Monitoring will facilitate timely identification of problems and successes, and
appropriate adjustment of implementation arrangements across all project levels.

     9.2   Purpose and approach for Monitoring

Monitoring will adopt a participatory, multi-tiered approach, aligning roles of the
Community Interest Groups, Integrated Hydroshed Committees, CPCUs, and the
NPCU.
Each structure will prepare a PF Monitoring Plan, to be:


Validated through the PF implementation process and ligned with the overall
KEWASIP M&E framework; and
These plans will define indicators, responsibilities, budgets, and reporting frequency,
ensuring all committees operate under project rules and validated processes.


Monitoring will be the main structure through which the implementers of the project
will get the feedback, alert on any delays and problems. The monitoring plans help
the implementers to measure the pace of implementation of activities. It enables


                                                                                    102
timely responses while providing lessons on implementation strategies. It is expected
that Community Interest Group and Integrated Hydroshed committees will have its
plan that will be used for verification of the following, among others:
   a. Time to execute an activity;
   b. Ensuring all affected persons/communities are involved;
   c. Scheduling of meetings with affected communities and persons;
   d. Scheduling of compensation and/or assistance (if any);
   e. Scheduling of processes such as livelihood restoration;
   f. Provision of indicative time for fund releases;
   g. Provision of indicative times for receiving and settling grievances/complaints
   h. Scheduling of periodical evaluation and check on compliance.


The project will utilize a participatory monitoring and evaluation process which will
ensure monitoring of the effectiveness of mitigation measures to improve (or at least
maintain) community’s standards of living. Monitoring will involve the affected
community members, so that they have first-hand understanding and appreciation of
the process as well as have the opportunity to express their views on the positive
and negative impacts.


The project will support affected communities to monitor:
 i.    The status of adverse social impacts (e.g. limited access to forest and wildlife
       resources inside the project-supported forests, forest reserves, national parks
       and wildlife, etc.) and the effectiveness of mitigation measures outlined. The
       project will have to ensure that members of communities are aware of the
       potential adverse impacts to monitor; also, specific indicators will be developed
       with the communities to ensure effective monitoring of each impact;
ii.    Affected people’s satisfaction with the implementation of actual mitigation
       measures;
iii.   If affected individuals, households and communities have been able to maintain
       their pre-project standard of living, and even improve on it;
iv.    The PF establishes participatory monitoring arrangements for project activities,
       with particular focus on their beneficial and adverse impacts on people within


                                                                                       103
      the project area. Monitoring will also assess the effectiveness of measures
      taken to restore or improve incomes, livelihoods, and living standards. Results
      will be regularly documented, shared with stakeholders, and used to
      strengthen adaptive management throughout project implementation; and,
v.    The effectiveness of the conflict resolution and grievance settlement
      mechanisms.

     9.3   Monitoring Scope, Indicators and Arrangements

The purpose of monitoring is to generate regular feedback on the implementation of
this Process Framework (PF) and to ensure adaptive management. Monitoring will
provide timely information on progress, identify challenges, and support corrective
actions.
Monitoring teams at the watershed level will compile periodic reports which will be
reviewed and consolidated at the national level by the NPCU. Monitoring will cover
process, output, and outcome indicators to assess participation, livelihood
restoration, and institutional performance.


a. Key Monitoring Indicators
Participation: Number and diversity of participants (including Minority Communities
and Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups – MCs/VMGs) engaged in consultations and
PF-related activities; level of satisfaction among PAPs and affected communities.
Livelihoods:   Number    of     households    benefitting   from   alternative   livelihood
interventions; percentage of beneficiaries reporting restored or improved incomes;
and overall results achieved.
Institutional Performance: Effectiveness of coordination mechanisms, compliance
with PF and Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) requirements, and
implementation of corrective actions.
Baseline and target values for these indicators will be determined through the
baseline socio-economic assessment (see Section 8.4), with agreement on actions,
timing, and targets at community and watershed levels.


     b. Baseline and Socio-Economic Assessment



                                                                                      104
A baseline socio-economic assessment will be conducted for each site or watershed
prior to the start of PF activities to provide the foundation for tracking changes and
measuring outcomes as follows:
  i.    Lead: NPCU, in collaboration with CPCUs and community structures
 ii.    Timeline: Within six months of PF roll-out
 iii.   Budget: Provided under the M&E component
 iv.    Approval: By the NPCU and the State Department for Forestry


Baseline   data   will   include   demographic    characteristics,   livelihood   sources,
vulnerability status, and dependence on natural resources. These data will inform
eligibility and provide the reference for outcome tracking.
Follow-up assessments will measure changes in income, wellbeing, and access to
resources, emphasizing livelihood restoration outcomes rather than only outputs.


    c. Monitoring Teams and Frequency
Monitoring teams will comprise representatives from:
  i.    Community Interest Groups and Integrated Hydroshed Committees;
 ii.    CPCU Environmental and Social Officers;
 iii.   Technical staff from project implementing entities;
 iv.    Relevant NGOs or CSOs within the project area.


Each team will operate under approved Terms of Reference (ToRs) specifying
composition, qualifications, funding, and reporting responsibilities.


Monitoring Frequency:
  i.    Community-level tracking – Monthly
 ii.    Watershed-level reporting – Monthly
 iii.   National consolidation (NPCU) – Quarterly
 iv.    Independent evaluations – Biennially




                                                                                      105
Livelihood monitoring will document both quantitative results (e.g., income levels,
enterprises supported) and qualitative outcomes (e.g., PAP satisfaction, perceived
livelihood improvement).
Evaluation Program
An evaluation program will be implemented periodically to review compliance with
ESS requirements, assess performance and effectiveness, and capture lessons
learned. Evaluations will inform adjustments to strategies to strengthen PF
implementation and ensure sustainable restoration outcomes.

Project Administrative Reporting

Under this proposed monitoring system, the standard record of activities undertaken
in each reporting period (monthly, quarterly, and annually) along with financial
information will be provided. This will cover routine project activities reporting,
equipment needs and status, and other administrative concerns (e.g., additional
studies needed). For this PF, the periodic project progress reports will include a
section that details, for instance, the number and type of local meetings held (e.g.,
on restrictions on gazetted forests), the number and types of grievances registered
and the status of their resolution, and the nature of mitigation measures
implemented, as well as the findings on the socio- economic monitoring. The reports
will also cover progress with alternative livelihoods, number, sex, and satisfaction of
participating PAPs and affected community member, and other indicators agreed on.

   9.4    Socio-economic Monitoring

This will focus on changes and happenings to livelihoods including income levels and
standards of living of PAPs/community members. For areas in the vicinity of project-
supported forests, baseline socio-economic data are included in the area
management plans. The data available will be used as the basis for determining the
eligibility of communities, individuals for assistance and base for measuring changes.
It will also be used for designing measures to assist the affected persons in their
efforts to improve their livelihoods. The baseline assessment will include detailed
information on demographic characteristics, income sources, nature of vulnerability
(if any), group membership, leadership positions, and reliance on forest and wildlife




                                                                                   106
resources among others. With this baseline, the Project Coordination Unit will
monitor the success of mitigation measures over time.


Follow-up assessments will update these data for the purpose of monitoring and
evaluation of the implementation and impacts of the particular watershed and
gazetted forests therein. The specific monitoring indicators will be outlined in the
Action Plan. Possible indicators include numbers of eligible communities and
households; the potential livelihood impacts to these communities and households of
new or more strictly enforced restrictions on use of resources in the gazetted forests;
livelihood benefits of measures to assist the affected persons; numbers of
communities, households, groups and individuals participating in financial schemes
and grants; and funds disbursed to the eligible communities, groups, individuals and
households.


Project activities shall be monitored by the E&S Officers at the NPCU and CPCUs to
ensure transparency in the implementation of mitigation measures, livelihood
restoration actions, and restriction enforcement. This monitoring safeguards human
rights and enables timely management of any violations, preventing impacts on
project cost, progress, and legacy.



   9.5    Reporting and Information Dissemination

The National Project Coordinating Unit (NPCU) is responsible for gathering, analyzing,
reporting and disseminating the information obtained from the proposed M&E
system with the National Project Steering Committee, State Department for Forestry,
and the World Bank. Disclosed information will include progress summaries,
indicators achieved, livelihood outcomes, grievance statistics, and adaptive actions
taken.


Reports will also be shared iteratively with community structures and representative
organizations for feedback and transparency throughout the PF cycle—from
inception, through implementation, to evaluation.The NPCU will report to the
National Project Steering Committee on the results of all reports that cover any and

                                                                                  107
all aspects of this process framework. The NPCU will then use the information to
make decisions regarding project implementation to ensure the efficiency and
effectiveness of project restorative measures, and of the implementation of this PF.
Aside from the NPCU, the reports will be presented to the State Department for
Forestry as the fiduciary agency who will then submit reports to the World Bank.


The NPCU will provide the information to community groups and representative
organization of forest dwellers and affected communities for their feedback and
incorporation into their activities as it relates to project implementation. Community
members     and     stakeholders   including   designated   independent     non-profit
organizations/NGOs will have an opportunity to review reported information and
provide feedback.


   10.        Indicative budget for implementation of the process
      framework

Implementation of this Process Framework (PF) will be financed through the
Environmental and Social (E&S) Management budget of the KEWASIP. The PF is
therefore not a stand-alone financial instrument; its activities and costs are
embedded within the broader E&S work program that supports implementation of
the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Stakeholder
Engagement Plan (SEP), and Labor Management Procedures (LMP).


The National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU), hosted under the State Department
for Forestry (MoECCF), will manage the PF budget as part of the consolidated E&S
budget line. The NPCU’s Environmental and Social Specialists will be responsible for
planning, authorizing, and reporting on PF expenditures through approved annual
work plans and budgets (AWPBs). Expenditures will include facilitation of
consultations, FPIC processes, livelihood restoration activities, GRM operations,
training, and monitoring and evaluation.




                                                                                   108
A contingency provision (10 %) within the E&S safeguards budget will remain
available under NPCU control to address unforeseen PF needs such as additional
FPIC sessions, dispute resolution processes, or unanticipated livelihood impacts.




Table 10: Indicative Budget for Process Framework Implementation
                                                            Estimated Cost       Responsible
Activity            Description
                                                            in USD.              Institution
                                                            40,000
                                                            (Community
                                                            sensitization
                                                            meetings      (12
                                                            meetings × 150
                                                            USD/meeting)
                                                            FPIC sessions (6
                                                            sessions × 400
                                                            USD/session)
                                                            Translation      &
                    Community sensitization, FPIC           materials
Community           sessions, translation, materials,       (printing     800
Engagement &        training of GRM committees,             copies × 1.5         NPCU/CPCUs
Capacity Building   MCs/VMG reps, CFAs, WRUAs,              USD/copy),
                    KFS/KWS/CIGs/CPCU 12staff               Training of GRM
                                                            committees      (8
                                                            trainings × 300
                                                            USD/training),
                                                            Training
                                                            MCs/VMGs reps,
                                                            CFAs,      WRUAs,
                                                            KFS/KWS, CPCU
                                                            staff         (10
                                                            trainings × 350
                                                            USD/training)).
Strengthening &      Refresher trainings, grievance         25,000               NPCU/CPCUs
Operation of GRM    registers, communications (hotline /    Refresher
System              info), local logistics, GRM inclusion   trainings       (6
                    for VMGs/women                          trainings × 300


                                                                                       109
                                                       USD)
                                                       •       Grievance
                                                       registers       (30
                                                       registers × 10
                                                       USD)
                                                       •
                                                       Communication:
                                                       hotline updates,
                                                       info posters (200
                                                       posters × 2 USD)
                                                       • Local logistics
                                                       for GRM sessions
                                                       (20 sessions ×
                                                       150           USD)
                                                       •         Inclusion
                                                       support for VMGs
                                                       (transport
                                                       stipends × 2,000
                                                       USD)
                                                       45,000 Baseline
                                                       household survey
                                                       (400 households
                                                       ×                 5
                                                       USD/household)
                                                       •Follow-up
                                                       survey (400 × 5
                                                       USD)
                                                       •Participatory
                  Baseline & follow-up household       monitoring
Monitoring,       surveys, participatory monitoring,   committee
                                                                            NPCU/CPCUs/internal
Evaluation &      annual learning workshops,           meetings        (12
                                                                            auditors
Social Audits     independent mid-term & close-out     meetings × 100
                  social audits                        USD)
                                                       • Annual review
                                                       workshops        (2
                                                       workshops         ×
                                                       1,500         USD)
                                                       •Independent
                                                       midterm & close-
                                                       out social audits
                                                       (2 audits × 5,000
                                                       USD)
                                                       20,000         Staff
Administration,   Staff travel, field allowances,
                                                       transport      (200
Coordination &    communications, technical working                         NPCU
                                                       field days × 20
Logistics         group meetings, equipment
                                                       USD/day)

                                                                                  110
                                                           •Field allowances
                                                           (200 days × 15
                                                           USD)
                                                           •Communication
                                                           costs (lump sum)
                                                           •Technical
                                                           working      group
                                                           meetings        (10
                                                           meetings × 250
                                                           USD)
Contingency         To cover unforeseen safeguard-         17,700          For NPCU
(10%)               related costs                          unforeseen
                                                           safeguard or PF-
                                                           related      needs
                                                           (e.g., additional
                                                           FPIC,      conflict-
                                                           resolution
                                                           meetings, extra
                                                           SA work)
                                                           139,700(USD)




   11.        Stakeholder consultations and disclosure

   11.1 Introduction

In accordance with the World Bank Environmental and Social Standard 10 (ESS10)
on Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure, a Stakeholder Engagement
Plan (SEP) has been prepared for KEWASIP. The SEP guides broad stakeholder
engagement throughout the Project—covering identification, analysis, information
disclosure, and ongoing consultation with all stakeholders, including government
institutions, civil society organizations, private sector actors, and the public.


By contrast, the Process Framework (PF) focuses on site-specific consultations and
decision-making    processes     involving   Project   Affected   Persons    (PAPs)   and
communities directly impacted by access restrictions under ESS5. The PF provides
the forum through which affected communities agree on:


      The nature and scope of access restrictions;

                                                                                      111
      Governance and enforcement regimes for resource use; and

      Mitigation   and   livelihood   restoration   measures   to   address   economic
       displacement.


References to displacement in this section should therefore be understood as
economic displacement due to restricted access to resources. The PF does not cover
physical displacement, which is excluded under the Project’s safeguards framework
and would be addressed separately through a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
if triggered.



   11.2 Consultations under the Process Framework

All activities that may impose access restrictions or result in economic displacement
will be accompanied by inclusive consultations with affected PAPs and communities.
During PF implementation, PAPs will have continuous access to information
regarding their rights, mitigation options, eligibility for assistance, and grievance
redress mechanisms.
Consultations under the PF will be carried out at multiple stages and levels to ensure
that all PAPs, community institutions, and stakeholders participate meaningfully in
developing and validating access restriction and livelihood restoration measures.


Purpose and Scope
Consultations will aim to:
      Inform PAPs and communities about proposed project activities and potential
       restriction impacts;
      Provide opportunities for stakeholders to express concerns, propose
       alternatives, and jointly design mitigation measures;
      Secure community consent and ownership (“social license to operate”)
       through transparent decision-making and validation of resource governance
       arrangements;
      Ensure inclusion of vulnerable and marginalized groups (VMGs), minority
       communities (MCs), women, youth, and persons with disabilities; and


                                                                                    112
      Establish clear agreements on restrictions, benefit-sharing mechanisms, and
       livelihood restoration measures.


Approach and Methods
Consultations will be continuous, culturally appropriate, and inclusive, using
approaches such as:
      Focus group discussions with PAPs and affected user groups;
      Key informant interviews (e.g., with local leaders, elders, CFA/WRUA leaders);
      Participatory planning and mapping workshops;
      Household or community meetings in local languages; and
      Disclosure and feedback sessions on draft PF-related plans and measures.


Consultation Topics
Typical issues for consultation will include:
i. Project information, objectives, and anticipated impacts;
ii. Proposed access restrictions and affected livelihood activities;
iii. Mitigation and livelihood restoration measures;
iv. Roles and responsibilities of PAPs, local institutions, and implementing agencies;
v. Conflict management and grievance redress procedures; and
vi. Feasibility and cultural appropriateness of proposed economic opportunities.



   11.3 Disclosure Requirements

consultations will be iterative and linked directly to site-level pf implementation,
ensuring that local agreements feed into the preparation of site management plans,
livelihood restoration plans (lrps), and related instruments.
Information disclosure will accompany each phase of PF implementation to ensure
transparency, accountability, and continuous community feedback.
Disclosure Process. The National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) will oversee
disclosure of:
      The approved Process Framework (PF) and subsequent updates;
      Site-level PF Implementation Reports;



                                                                                       113
       Agreed Action Plans, including Livelihood Restoration Plans (LRPs) and
        monitoring results; and
       Grievance and conflict resolution summaries (aggregated and anonymized).




Channels of Disclosure
The KEWASIP Process Framework and related documents will be disclosed through
Community-level dissemination:
       Barazas, chiefs’ offices, forest station noticeboards, and community centers;
       County-level offices: CPCUs, county environmental and forestry offices;
       National-level platforms: NPCU website and implementing agency portals (KFS,
        KWS, WRA, KEFRI);
       Printed copies: available at NPCU and CPCU offices for public review.


Information will be disclosed in formats and languages appropriate to the target
audiences. Feedback from communities will be incorporated into the finalization of
PF-related plans and activities.


   11.4 Reporting and Follow-Up
PF consultations and disclosure outcomes will be summarized in periodic reports by
the NPCU and shared with the National Project Steering Committee and the World
Bank.
Reports will include:
       Stakeholders engaged and methods used;
       Issues raised and how they were addressed;
       Agreements reached on restrictions, mitigation measures, and benefit sharing;
        and
       Follow-up actions and timelines.


These reports will also be shared at the community level to ensure transparency and
accountability.


REFERENCES

                                                                                   114
   World Bank 2017, Guidance Notes on ESS 1, ESS5 and ESS10.
   National Council for Law Reporting (2010) The Constitution of Kenya, 2010.
    Nairobi: National Council for Law Reporting.
   World Bank (2017) Environmental and Social Framework. Washington, DC:
    The World Bank.
   Kenya, Government of (2007) Kenya Vision 2030: A Globally competitive and
    prosperous Kenya. Nairobi: Government Printer.




                                                                             115
   12.Annexes


ANNEX 1: LIST OF KEY INFORMANTS

List of participants available upon request due to data protection
requirements.


ANNEX 2: FGD ATTENDANCE SHEETS – CHYULLU HILLS – WOMEN


List of participants available upon request due to data protection
requirements.



ANNEX 3: FGD ATTENDANCE SHEETS – CHYULLU HILLS –MEN

List of participants available upon request due to data protection
requirements.



ANNEX 4: FGD ATTENDANCE SHEETS – NYAMBENE HILLS –WOMEN

List of participants available upon request due to data protection
requirements.


ANNEX 5: ATTENDANCE SHEET: ENGAGEMENTS WITH THE COMMUNITY GROUPS
FROM KWALE COUNTY AT KWALE CULTURAL CENTRE (28/11/2024)

List of participants available upon request due to data protection
requirements.


ANNEX 6: ATTENDANCE SHEET: ENGAGEMENTS WITH THE COMMUNITY GROUPS
FROM MAKUENI COUNTY IN KAMBU AT LUTHERAN CHURCH HALL (26/11/2024)

List of participants available upon request due to data protection
requirements.


ANNEX 7: ATTENDANCE SHEETS FOR ENGAGEMENTS AT KIBWEZI WITH THE
COUNTY OFFICIALS FROM MAKUENI AND TAITA TAVETA COUNTIES.

List of participants available upon request due to data protection
requirements.




                                                                     116
