Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01226




Public Disclosure Authorized
       The World Bank
       RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
Chad                           P509357                     SAHEL RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through
                                                           Sustainable Natural Resource Management
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
WESTERN AND CENTRAL            10-Oct-2025                 28-Nov-2025                   Environment, Natural
AFRICA                                                                                   Resources & the Blue
                                                                                         Economy
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Finance,        Ministry of Environment,
Financing (IPF)                Budget, Economy and Plan    Fisheries and Sustainable
                                                           Development

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To support climate resilient landscapes and livelihoods through sustainable natural resource management in targeted
areas in Chad.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                      109.31

  Total Financing                                                                                           109.31
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              100.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                              100.00


                                                                                                                 Page 1
         The World Bank
         RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)


          IDA Grant                                                                                                                  100.00
      Non-World Bank Group Financing
       Trust Funds                                                                                                                      9.31
          Adaptation Fund                                                                                                               9.31




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                               Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                The review did authorize the preparation to continue




    Other Decision (as needed)

    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context


1.       Chad is a landlocked, low-density and climatically diverse, Sahelian Least Developed Country (LDC) with a
population of 18.2 million inhabitants in 2023,1 most of whom are rural (76 percent).2 Despite considerable natural
resources and significant oil production since 2003, Chad remains among the poorest and least developed countries in the
World. At the national level, the incidence of poverty in Chad has increased by 2.5 percentage points, rising from 42.3
percent in 2018 to 44.8 percent in 2022. This increase implies that the poor population has grown by 1.2 million, reaching
a total of 7.8 million3. Poverty remains predominantly a rural phenomenon, with one out of every two people living in
rural areas being classified as poor. Additionally, there are significant regional disparities in poverty distribution, with most
of the poor remains concentrated in the southern regions of the country. Inequality has slightly increased, as evidenced
by the Gini index rising from 33.6 in 2018 to 34.3 in 2022. The country Human Development Index of just 0.394 is the 5th
lowest in the world and third worst in Sub-Saharan Africa.4 Chad also ranks among the last in the world on the World Bank
Human Capital Index (0.3, on a scale of 0 to 1).
2.      Chad’s economy has proven resilient despite the war in neighboring Sudan. In 2024, its gross domestic product
(GDP) is estimated at $18.5 billion, supported by higher oil production and public investment. Its agricultural sector
contributed in 2023 to 40 percent of its GDP, on its way to recovering from the flood events of 2022, which affected an

1
  (i) United Nations Population Division. World Population Prospects: 2022 Revision; (ii) Statistical databases and publications from
national statistical offices; (iii) Eurostat: Demographic Statistics; (iv) United Nations Statistics Division. Population and Vital Statistics
Report (various years).
2
  World Bank staff estimates based on the United Nations Population Division's World Urbanization Prospects: 2018 Revision.
3
  World Bank, Poverty, Shared Prosperity, and Equity Update-Chad (2024).
4
  UNDP (2024). Human Development Report 2023-24.

                                                                                                                                          Page 2
       The World Bank
       RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)


estimated 465,030 hectares of farmland. However, the 2024 flood threatens to reverse some progress made during the
last years as its impact as caused the 2024 lean season to be projected to be one of the worst in the country's history.
Indeed, floods following heavy rains have destroyed over 157,000 hectares of crops (FAO) and resulted in the loss of more
than 7,000 head of livestock, and this will lead to a drop in production.

3.       Chad is the most vulnerable country to climate change.5 Due to a combination of changing weather patterns and
desertification, it is expected that agro-ecological zones will shift, affecting ecosystems, biodiversity and crop production.
Different models project regionally varying changes in species richness and tree cover in response to climate change.
Agriculture, biodiversity and water are highly vulnerable to climate change. Insufficient rains and frequent flooding have
often had adverse impacts on agriculture, the main sector of employment, which, together with conflict and displacement,
has led to chronic food insecurity. Water availability for human consumption is projected to decline in the future due to a
combination of climate change and population growth while demand will also increase. Despite marginal changes in
precipitations are predicted, dry and wet periods are likely to be more frequent, extreme, and prolonged. According to
the CCDR of G5 Sahel, if no adaptation policies are taken, the impacts of climate shocks through six main channels (rainfed
crop yields, livestock yields, heat-labor productivity, human health-productivity, flooding damages, and road and bridges
damages)) will cause the poverty rate to increase by 10.6 percentage points by 2050.
4.       Chad, classified as a Fragile and conflict-affected situation, has several drivers of fragility. Chad is characterized
by significant fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV). Chad is emerging from a period of political transition, with Presidential
election held in May 2024 and legislative elections held in December 2024. Despite relative stability during his tenure in a
challenging regional environment, the country faced escalating violence in the Lake Chad basin since 2015 due to attacks
by the violent extremist group Boko Haram that emerged from Nigeria. The northern regions, home to numerous
rebellions (e.g., the rebel attacks against N’Djamena in 2006 and 2008), also experienced violence related to gold
exploitation, while inter-communal violence in the East and South increased due to competition over natural resources,
particularly between farmers and herders, exacerbated by the emergence of elite livestock owners, forced displacement,
and climate change. In spite of being one of the poorest countries in the world, Chad has hosted over 720 000 refugees
and more than 220 000 Chadian returnees have entered eastern Chad,6 since the beginning of the conflict in Sudan in April
2023, further straining the country's already limited resources, particularly in the eastern and southern provinces, leading
to increased poverty, food insecurity, and pressure on basic services.
5.      Chad ranked 189 out of 193 on the Gender Inequality Index in 2022. Only 40.5 percent of women are active in
the labor force.7 They are disproportionally affected by poverty and have significantly less livelihood opportunities than
men.8 While women and girls are also often more vulnerable and suffer more from the consequences of food insecurity,
they remain the main pillars of agricultural production in the country. Women are often confined to cultivating subsistence
crops through traditional farming practices, with little access to extension and advisory services or farm inputs. Gender-
related inequalities also extend to access to tenure security, financial services, and knowledge. These disparities have
profound consequences for household productivity, income diversification, and intergenerational economic mobility.



5
  https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/rankings/
6
  WHO, Sudan conflict – Situation in refugee-hosting countries, December 2024.
7
  World Bank, World Development Indicators database. Estimates are based on data obtained from International Labour
Organization and United Nations Population Division.
8
  A technical study on gender and climate change conducted as part of the ALBIA project, “Etude sur le genre et l’impact du
changement climatique sur les femmes et les mécanismes d’adaptation aux changements climatiques », March 2020

                                                                                                                              Page 3
         The World Bank
         RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)


    Sectoral and Institutional Context

6.       The national territory of the Republic of Chad is one of the largest in Africa and extends over an area of 1.3
million km2. This territory is subdivided into three main ecological zones: the desert area north of the country with
approximately 60 million ha, the Sahelian zone in the center covering an area of 55.4 million ha, and the Sudanese zone
in the south spreading over an area of 13 million ha. Outside of bare land (55.3 percent), the Chadian territory is occupied
by grasslands (33.9 percent), cultivated land (8.5 percent), forests and savannahs (2.1 percent), permanent wetlands (0.1
percent), and other lands (0.1 percent). Chad has an estimated 39 million ha of cultivable land and 5.6 million ha of irrigable
land, while its forest biomass is estimated at 10.9 million hectares (National Great Green Wall Agency).
7.       Chad's economy is essentially based on agriculture and livestock. These two activities remain the biggest job
providers employing more than 85 percent of the workforce and contributing 44 percent to the country's GDP9. The rural
population depends heavily on the exploitation of natural resources and most of the population making a living from
agriculture, livestock, fishing, small commerce and crafts. Agriculture and pastoralism account for 73 percent of household
income (Chad poverty Assessment, 2021). Declining levels of rainfall and rising temperatures pose a severe risk to rural
Chadian households which earn their livelihood from agriculture. In the other hand, persistent drought has accelerated
desertification in the northern part of the country, reducing the size of agro-pastoral areas and spurring a southward shift
in transhumance patterns, heightening tensions between farming and herding communities.
8.       Chad's natural resources are increasingly under pressure as the country's population increases. Land
productivity deteriorates as a result of excessive or inadequate use and there is greater competition for scarce resources
such as land, pastures and water. The cost of land degradation is estimated at 7 percent of GDP, reflecting considerable
impacts, especially due to changes in land use, water erosion and overgrazing10. Forested areas, wetlands and rangelands
are converted for cultivation or to respond to growing urbanization. Chad’s forest area has dropped from 5 percent of
total land area in 2000 to 3.3 percent in 2021 (Word Development Indicators). The north of the country is primarily desert
(600,370 km2) with a vegetative cover of 46 km2, and further south the Sahelian band (553,590 km2) has a vegetative cover
of around 450 km2. The Sudanian zone, in the South of the country, covers an area of 130,040 km 2 and has a vegetation
cover of around 87, 000 km2.
9.       Land degradation trends are generally negative with signs for potential to improve. Recent evaluations of
degradation in Chad11 nationally and in and around the Ouadi Rime Ouadi Achime (OROA) Nature Reserve have indicated
that there are both positive and negative trends. The areas with the greatest degradation are in the South where there
are the largest populations and biological cover densities. In the areas of central and northern latitudes, the trends are
generally towards greater degradation; however, because of the OROA reserve, this specific region has been projected to
improve in terms of siltation and changes in erosion. The importance of maintaining the reserve and areas around the
reserve can serve as a bulwark against land degradation, with effective support.

10.    Several high valued NTFP species make a significant contribution to the economy (gum Arabic, dates,
“savonnier12”) but their potential remains largely untapped. Gum Arabic derived from the Acacia tree is estimated to



9
  Chad Country Environmental Analysis, report no. 174666
10
   Ibid.
11
   Assessing Nature's Contributions to People in Ouadi Rime Ouadi Achim Wildlife Reserve and Surroundings, Chad, conducted by
ETIFOR at the request of the World Bank, 2024. Degradation Assessment for Chad, INVEST, at the request of the World Bank, 2025.
12
   Balanites Aegyptiaca, ou « le datier du desert »

                                                                                                                            Page 4
       The World Bank
       RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)


represent close to 7 percent of the country's global export value in 2019.13 In 2022, Chad was the third largest exporter of
Gum Arabic in the word. Gum Arabic is also the fourth export product after oil, livestock and cotton in the country, with
an annual production of 30,000 tons. However, Chad’s cash and food crop value chains are underdeveloped and
fragmented with a lack of certifications, standards, and grading systems, preventing the country from harnessing the full
potential of crop production. This is compounded by poor or lack of hard infrastructure including transport, limited private
sector development, and inadequate energy supply. Regarding gum Arabic, one major challenge is that only a section of
its value chain occurs in Chad, and no important value addition such as processing or manufacturing occurs in the country.
Collection is based on the presence of randomly occurring trees, without much, if any, maintenance or regeneration of
aging stock.

11.      Food crops (particularly grains) and cash crops (notably cotton, sugar cane and gum Arabic) are extremely
vulnerable to climate-related hazards. The NDC for Chad recognizes the importance of the NTFP sub-sector to generate
benefits and the need to support the production of key crops. Greater focus needs to be directed toward building
resilience within the agro-silvo-pastoral system to mitigate the impacts of changing weather patterns due to climate
change and to ensure greater food security for the population of Chad. Variable water flows are becoming more erratic.
In addition to primary water flows, temporary basins and smaller bodies of water are locally important for local
populations. Some examples of seasonal and locally important water flows include the ouaddis of Kanem and Ouaddaï,
natural and artificial ponds, a few artificial reservoirs, and the oases and lakes of Ennedi, Borkou and Tibesti.
Notwithstanding the presence of these hydrological systems, the vagaries of rainfall increase the vulnerability of the rural
poor, making them more susceptible to climatic shocks. Zones or parts of the country with below-average rainfall are also
those with the greatest inter-annual rainfall variations, often threatening the circumstances of the poorest households
that are least able to cope with drastic weather and pushing many below the poverty line14.
12.     The need for affordable animal feed solutions is becoming crucial in the context of climate change, increasing
insecurity and related reduction of cattle mobility. Damage in the livestock sector because of climate variability is also
considerable, with losses estimated at US$26 million15. Climatic hazards negatively impact the availability and quality of
fodder, impacts that are felt through changes in the usual livestock migration routes and the lengthening of transhumance
movements, sometimes exacerbating inter-community conflicts.16 Expansion and extension of fodder enhancement
techniques can reduce pressures on the natural resource base and provide more sustainable and predictable economic
opportunities with regards to livestock, that is predominant in the region.


 Relationship to CPF

13.       The project’s objectives are fully aligned with the Western and Central Africa Region Priorities (2021-2025),
the Chad Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2022) and Chad Country Engagement Note (CEN, 2023-2024), with a
strong focus on resilient livelihoods, institutions building, and promoting natural resource management and sustainable
agriculture. The proposed operation aligns with the objectives of the most recent Country Engagement Note (CEN)17,
Objective 4: Promote natural resource management and sustainable agriculture. The proposed operation will continue to

13
   Chad Economic Update, 2022
14
   WB, Note on the Water and Sanitation Sector -Tchad 2019
15
   FAO Feuille de Route COP28, 2023
16
   Chad Nationally Determined Contribution, 2021.
17
   Chad Country Engagement Note, 2022, Report No. P500092

                                                                                                                        Page 5
       The World Bank
       RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)


support the restoration and sustainable management of natural resources (including land, water, wildlife and flora), and
to improve the livelihoods of populations in climate vulnerable areas. The operation support the CEN emphasis on the
adoption of short-term actions which stand to support medium to longer-term efforts that reduce exposure, mitigate risk,
and enhance resilience.

14.       The proposed project will support Chad’s national and climate strategies. The project will be aligned with the
proposed objectives of Axis 3 of Chad’s National Development Plan (NDP) PND 2024-2028, currently being validated
nationally, by fostering strong, diversified, inclusive, and resilient economic growth. The project will contribute to
alleviating poverty and reducing inequalities by creating broader access to employment and income opportunities,
especially for young people and women. The proposed Point will support efforts towards meeting its 2021 Nationally
Determined Contribution (NDC) adaptation and mitigation commitments and its objectives under the first National
Adaptation Plan (NAP) to Climate Change prepared in 2021 and submitted in 2021. The Chad NDC also recognizes the
importance of the NTFP sub-sector to generate benefits and the need to support the production of key crops in the country
as part of effective adaptation and sustainable development. The proposed project will support Chad in achieving the
objective of reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 19.3% by 2030 compared to the reference scenario in accordance
with the commitments made in the NDC. This represents Chad's overall commitment to mitigation, conditional on access
to international financing and capacity building. The NTFP sub-sector is identified specifically as an opportunity to generate
benefits and the need to support the production of key crops in the country as part of effective adaptation and sustainable
development. The project will intervene in improving the country's efforts to strengthen the resilience of agriculture, a
key sector for the economy and food security of vulnerable agricultural areas benefiting from adaptation measures
(irrigation systems, soil conservation, etc.), in light of the NAP.

15.      The interventions of the proposed project respond to priorities identified at the intersect between two
significant World Bank Global Challenge Programs (GCP): The Forest GCP and the Water Security and Climate Adaptation
GCP. By supporting more resilient water infrastructure and increasing water storage such as with sub-surface water /
groundwater harvesting techniques and catchment, the project aligns with the fast-track Water Security and Climate
Adaptation GCP “Pillar 3: Reducing the impacts of floods and droughts and managing water resources sustainably”. The
project will invest in natural/green water catchment infrastructure and thus contribute to reducing drought risks, fostering
healthier watersheds and enhancing climate security and adaptation. Also, by restoring degraded land, addressing drivers
of deforestation and promoting the use of agro-ecological practices among communities, the proposed project will limit
land erosion and contribute to greater productivity in rainfed systems. These interventions will address key cross-cutting
themes of the Forest GCP including conserving forest landscapes and financing land restoration activities.

16.     Through its focus on strengthening the climate resilience of landscapes and promoting diversified livelihoods
opportunities for rural communities in Chad, the project is aligned with the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Least
Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) Programming Strategy (2022-2026). The activities will contribute to building resilience
at the systems level including through technical and social interventions, directly benefitting Theme 1: Agriculture, Food
security, and Health on both agriculture and food security; Theme 2: Water in managing drought, desertification, and
flooding risk; and Theme 3: Nature Based Solutions (NBS) through interventions to protect, manage, and restore
ecosystems to provide biodiversity, socioeconomic and climate adaptation benefits. The project will contribute to the
LDCF Priority Area 1 by reinforcing policy coherence and strengthening institutional capacity; and Priority Area 3 by
delivering institutional strengthening and capacity building at national, provincial and local scales and by building



                                                                                                                         Page 6
       The World Bank
       RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)


partnerships as part of the greater WB-LDCF Sahel RESILAND Program under preparation, with the participation of other
Sahel countries such as Mali (see para 18 below).


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To support climate resilient landscapes and livelihoods through sustainable natural resource management in targeted
 areas in Chad.


  Key Results (From PCN)

17.     The project aims to strengthen the resilience of vulnerable rural populations in the face of climate change,
including the fight against land degradation and desertification, and to support the integrated and inclusive management
of natural resources, particularly sustainable access to water resources. The project will support the development of low-
carbon, nature-positive, value chains from NTFP for vulnerable populations, particularly women and young people in the
Sahel Region intervention zone and around.
18.     The expected key results from the project and proposed indicators include:
        •   Millions of hectares of terrestrial and aquatic areas under enhanced conservation and management
            (hectares). This is a Corporate Scorecard Results Indicator (CRI) and reports to LDCF indicator Area of land
            managed for climate resilience (ha).
                o Area of land restored (hectares). This is a GEF Core indicator and could be a sub-indicator to the
                    CRI.
                  o   Area under new or improved production techniques and technologies in agro-ecology/climate-
                      smart sustainable agriculture/low-impact sustainable production schemes (CRI, Hectares (Ha)).
        •   Millions of people with enhanced resilience to climate risks (disaggregated by gender, contributed to both
            key areas). This is a CSI and reports to GEF Core Indicator Number of direct beneficiaries disaggregated by
            gender as co-benefit of GEF investment and LDCF indicator Number of direct beneficiaries.
                  o   Number producers in the targeted value chains adopting improved practices on the harvest and
                      trade of agro-forestry products (disaggregated by gender).
                  o   Number of people trained or with awareness raised about climate risks (disaggregated by gender).
                      This is an LDCF indicator and could be a sub-indicator of the enhanced resilience to climate risks.
                  o   Number of farmers adopting new agro-ecology/climate-smart sustainable agriculture/low-impact
                      sustainable production technologies (disaggregated by gender).
                  o   Number of people with increased incomes from NTFP (disaggregated by gender).


 D. Concept Description

19.     The proposed project draws on lessons learned from on-going World Bank interventions in the country,
including: (i) the Local Development and Adaptation Project for Chad (ALBIA, P171611) which aims to improve the
management of natural resources and the livelihoods of populations in certain climate-vulnerable areas in and around the

                                                                                                                      Page 7
           The World Bank
           RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)


    OROA Reserve; and (ii) the Chad Territorial Development and Resilience Project (ResiTchad) which invest in climate-
    resilient community infrastructure such as boreholes, roads, urban resilience infrastructure, sociocultural centers, and
    small productive and income-generating investments. Specifically, the proposed project will strengthen local governance
    structures, i.e. scale-up local natural resources management committees developed under the ALBIA project. The
    proposed project will coordinate closely with the Chad Refugees and Host Communities Support Project currently under
    implementation.
    20.     The proposed project will build on the successful co-management and integrated landscapes approach
    promoted by the Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Projects I and II (PRAPS in French) and Phase I of the West Africa
    regional Food Systems Resilience Program (FSRP-I). A 2023 ICR for the Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project I
    (followed by a 2023 IEG ICR review of the Project) highlighted a set of lessons learned. Some of these lessons which the
    proposed project intends to apply include: (i) the need to promote social engagement through effective mechanisms to
    foster ownership, mitigate conflicts and ensure adequate service delivery and (ii) the importance to strengthen inclusion
    in projects targeting pastoralists to get at the root-cause of conflicts. If providing basic social services (health, education)
    is not possible, then the new project should work closely with other programs specifically providing those services.
    Although setting up local management (participatory) committees right from the start takes time, these governance
    mechanisms working under the purview of municipalities or professional organizations help prevent conflicts and increase
    the sustainability of the interventions. The proposed operation will seek to align with the new National Strategy for Social
    Cohesion in formalizing or setting up local committees to manage conflicts.

21. Chad is a participant in the regional FSRP-Phase II, currently under implementation. FSRP-II will increase Chad's
    preparedness against food insecurity and improve the resilience of the country's food systems through integrated
    landscape management practices, intra-regional trade of selected value chains and greater access to a range of advisory
    services. In addition, the proposed project will draw on early lessons learned and ensure synergies with the recently
    launched Territorial Development and Resilience Project, Resitchad. The project aims to improve access to infrastructure,
    basic services and economic opportunities, and enhance local institutions' capacity for local service delivery in selected
    areas of the country.

    22.      Other on-going World Bank projects such as the Mali Landscape Restoration and Resilience Project, and the
    Niger Integrated Landscape Management project are also informing the design of the proposed project in Chad as part
    of the Sahel RESILAND program. Building on experiences drawn from both the Mali and Niger landscape restoration
    projects, the proposed project in Chad will (i) adopt a community-driven activity identification approach and replicate
    successful practices such as the promotion of cost-effective technologies and practices for the rehabilitation of degraded
    lands, (ii) ensure that project interventions at commune level coincide with the preparation of multi-year communal
    integrated development plans, (iii) strengthen the PMU’s implementation capacity, and (iv) develop a conflict
    management strategy using remote monitoring of project activities in conflict-prone areas and grievance reporting.
    Relying on the involvement of traditional authorities and local governments will minimize potential conflict situations due
    to the recent influx of refugees from neighboring countries particularly Sudan. In addition to focusing on sound governance
    of natural resources management as the key driver of land degradation, the project also recognizes that supporting
    income-generating agro-silvo-pastoral activities for women will maximize chances for sustainability of the investments.
    23.     Resources from the LDCF, adaptation resources managed by the GEF, will contribute to maximizing the scale,
    impact, and reach of the climate adaptation activities.



                                                                                                                               Page 8
       The World Bank
       RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)


Project Target Area
24.     The proposed project intervention area will mostly coincide with the geographical limits of the Sahelian band
of the country. Intervention areas are currently identified by (provinces) including Bahr El Gazal, Batha, Borkou, Ennedi
Est, Ennedi Ouest, Guerra, Hadjer Lamis, Kanem, Ouaddai, Sila and Wadi Fira. The precise identification of intervention
areas for investment projects (land rehabilitation; irrigation systems; etc.) under Component 2 will be based on in-depth
assessments in consultation with local populations. The interventions will be defined at the departmental level, the
administrative level below Province, during project preparation.




                                                                                                                     Page 9
      The World Bank
      RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                             Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                 TBD
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                            No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
  Erik Reed
  Senior Environmental Specialist

  Taibou Adamou Maiga
  Senior Water Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient




                                                                                                     Page 10
     The World Bank
     RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)


 Ministry of Finance, Budget, Economy and Plan
 Tahir Hamid Nguilin
 Minister of State
 tahirtahiro@gmail.com

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Environment, Fisheries and Sustainable Development
 Hassan Bakhit Djamous
 Minister
 bakhitdjamoush@gmail.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Erik Reed, Taibou Adamou Maiga

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Ellysar Baroudy                      28-Jan-2025

Country Director:                      Rasit Pertev                         19-Feb-2025




                                                                                                    Page 11
