Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Kambarata-1 Hpp: Sustainable And Transformational Energy Program (P509251)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 12/30/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04690




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 02, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kambarata-1 Hpp: Sustainable And Transformational Energy Program (P509251)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P509251                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        K1 STEP                      2026

                     Operation Name            Kambarata-1 HPP: Sustainable and Transformational Energy Program

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Central Asia              Kyrgyz Republic, Uzbekistan               EUROPE AND CENTRAL           Energy & Extractives
                                                                                         ASIA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of               Ministry of Energy                        21-Apr-2025                  26-Sep-2025
                     Uzbekistan, Kyrgyz
                     Republic

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     18-Dec-2024               500,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To strengthen regional energy-water cooperation in Central Asia.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Operation Abstract: Summary Description of Proposed Operation The Kambarata-1 HPP, currently under development,
                     is a transformative greenfield hydropower project, emerged among the least-cost projects for expanding clean energy
                     resources in the Kyrgyz Republic and the Central Asia region. The project is located upstream of the Naryn river in the
                     Kyrgyz Republic. Although initially conceived during the Soviet Union era in the 1980s, construction never commenced
                     due to a lack of financing, which is estimated at around US$4 billion. In 2014, SNC Lavalin prepared a feasibility study for
                     the project. Upon commissioning, the project will have an installed capacity of 1,860 MW (~50% of current installed
                     capacity in the country), a 256-meter-high dam, 5.4 billion cubic meter reservoir, and 5,600 GWh annual generation.

                    Jan 02, 2025                                                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kambarata-1 Hpp: Sustainable And Transformational Energy Program (P509251)



                     The project will serve as the main foundation of the country’s energy system, facilitating the decarbonization pathway
                     and significantly improving water resource management in Central Asian region. The Kambarata-1 HPP project could
                     generate the following significant economic, social, and environmental benefits for the Kyrgyz Republic if it is developed
                     in a sustainable manner. It will: (i) support the government’s vision towards a green and affordable energy future; (ii)
                     achieve energy security by resolving the country’s winter energy deficits; (iii) enable the energy security and political
                     autonomy by avoiding reliance on imported energy, including from Russia; (iv) significantly gear power generation
                     toward meeting winter peak demand, thus fundamentally solving the country’s seasonal energy deficits; (v) generate
                     sustainable export revenues, thereby improving the sector financing performance; (vi) enable the diversification of the
                     country’s electricity mix through integration of solar and wind energy at scale; (vii) strengthen the regional coordination
                     efforts in energy and water resource management; and (viii) improve resilience to water related risks such as floods,
                     droughts, and managed irrigation in the region. International Energy Agency’s net-zero assessment also confirms the
                     hydropower as the backbone of global electricity security and the most cost-effective, dispatchable, and flexible low-
                     carbon technology option to integrate solar and wind. Kamabarata-1 is a regional project in nature. With demand
                     expected to grow by 40 percent by 2030, and triple by 2050 if carbon neutrality targets are to be met, substantial scale-
                     up of generation capacity is needed for the region to cater to its growing needs while supporting a clean energy
                     transition. The project, if fully funded, would be transformative as it would contribute to meeting the growing energy
                     demand and lower costs of energy transition in the Central Asia region, enhance energy security through the further
                     development of the Central Asia regional power market and help decarbonize the electricity grids in the Central Asia
                     region, which are currently highly dependent on coal and gas (above 70 percent) for power generation. The Bank’s
                     regional planning analyses confirm that Kambarata-1 would displace gas and coal fired generation in the region and thus
                     support the region low carbon development. In addition, the Kambarata-1 project will enable large-scale deployment of




Public Disclosure
                     variable renewable energy in the Kyrgyz Republic, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan through its flexible and storage capacity,
                     facilitating the decarbonization pathway in Central Asia. Furthermore, the Kamabarata-1 project would allow for better
                     management of water resources in Central Asia across seasonal variations, making it possible to better meet the
                     irrigation and other water needs of the downstream countries (Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan). An adequate financing and
                     development strategy will be required from the very beginning to ensure satisfactory technical, environmental, and
                     social outcomes and address any potential macro-fiscal issues. In this regard, upon the request from the Government,
                     the World Bank is providing a comprehensive support to the development of the Kamabarata-1 HPP project in a manner
                     that is fiscally, financially, technically, socially, and environmentally sustainable. The Bank’s ongoing $18.6mln Technical
                     Assistance for the Kambarata-1 HPP will finance: (i) updating previous studies to verify the technical feasibility and
                     economic viability; (ii) strengthening the environmental and social framework; (iii) developing a fiscally sustainable
                     financing plan and commercial framework; and (iv) project implementation support and capacity building. The Bank is in
                     discussion with the Governments for financing of the project in phases, and have been requested to play a lead arranger
                     role to attract other financiers for structuring a sustainable financing package for the project. The proposed Bank
                     support under this MPA builds upon the long-standing partnership with the Government of Kyrgyz Republic,
                     Government of Uzbekistan, and Government of Kazakhstan as the Bank has been selected as the lead partner in
                     designing and implementing broader energy sector and tariff reforms. The MPA will also contribute to the Bank’s
                     ongoing initiative on strengthening the energy connectivity and trade in Central Asia, including through the
                     establishment of a regional electricity market under a pipeline project. Phase 1 of the K1-STEP Program will consist of
                     the following components. The division of construction activities between the phases of the MPA will be further refined
                     as the preparation progresses. Component 1: Early works. This component will finance the early works such as diversion
                     tunnels, dam, powerhouse and substation pre-excavation, site installation. Component 2. Project design, management
                     and supervision. This component will finance the PMC, project implementation support, and the operationalization of


                    Jan 02, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kambarata-1 Hpp: Sustainable And Transformational Energy Program (P509251)



                     the Kambarata-1 Regional JV. (a) Subcomponent 1. Operationalization of the Kambarata-1 Regional project company.
                     (b) Subcomponent 2. Project Management Consultancy (PMC). (c) Subcomponent 3. Project implementation support.
                     (d) Subcomponent 4. Owner’s cost. Component 3. Implementation of social and environmental management plans. This
                     component will finance the implementation and monitoring of E&S instruments including ESMP, Resettlement Policy
                     Framework (RPF) and Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP) requirements. This component will also support the
                     implementation of a comprehensive benefit sharing plan in support of possible affected communities and national
                     social programs. Component 4. Water management institutional capacity and regional coordination support. This
                     component will finance a set of hydro meteorological instrumentation and consultancy services required for the
                     Kambarata-1 HPP project, including key monitoring investments in the upper Naryn river basin to support the operation
                     of Kambarata-1 HPP and mitigate future climate risks, and improve the water management institutional foundations
                     within the Kambarata-1 HPP project and broader regional framework.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The proposed site is in the Jalal-Abad oblast, about 14 km upriver of the existing and operating Kambarata 2 on the
                     Naryn River. There are five dams on Naryn downriver of the site, and Atbashyn HPP located further upstream, on its
                     tributary . Kambarata 1 HPP would create a 60km2 reservoir extending about 68km into the Karabash gorge, within a
                     tectonic block composed of a Precambrian and Lower Palaeozoic sediments, often interlaced with Silurian granites. .
                     The project area is sparsely populated and no legally protected areas are identified in the project sites. As per
                     Integrated Biodiversity Assessment Tool (iBAT), minimum distance of such areas, beyond a 1km buffer, is 2.6 km from
                     upstream edge of the reservoir (Toguz Toro Wildlife Refuge). 10 species of plants and animals that are Endangered or



Public Disclosure
                     higher risk could be present within 50km buffer around the project area.
                     Around 10,000 people live around the project area in scattered settlements and four main rural centers (Nichke-Sai,
                     Toluk, Sary-Kamysh, and Kazarman). A significant proportion of the population are working-age people and children.
                     Remoteness of the area affects the quality of social infrastructure and living conditions of the local population. Their
                     main economic activity and source of income is livestock breeding, which is highly dependent on natural pastures. The
                     area is severely affected by emigration both within the Republic and overseas due to the lack of local job opportunities.
                     The most common uses of water downstream countries are domestic use and irrigation.
                     A largemajority of the population uses Kygyz as their only language of communicationand local cultural identity is based
                     on nomadic pastoralism withshepherd families annually moving with their herds from villages to pastures—including
                     the project’s area—where they stay for several months.
                     Currently, a local access road from K-2 is being improved on the left bank of its reservoir and a bridge across the Naryn
                     is being constructed.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of Energy (MoE) will provide guidance on overall Project implementation and coordinate with other
                     government agencies as needed to facilitate Project implementation. It has prepared several projects with Bank support
                     using the ESF assisted by environmental and social consultants, last ones being the KRED MPA and TA for Kambarata 1.
                     These are in initial stages of implementation and are rated satisfactory, even as works on the ground are just beginning.
                     With support under the on-going TA (P181086), a separate PMO for Kambarata 1 HPP is under establishment at the
                     MoE, separating out the responsibilities for the other ongoing projects. The PMO will take the lead responsibilities on
                     project management, including Environmental and Social aspects, procurement management, financial management. It
                     will include an environmental specialist, a social specialist, and an OHS specialist. An international consultant team, not

                    Jan 02, 2025                                                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kambarata-1 Hpp: Sustainable And Transformational Energy Program (P509251)



                     involved in the design of the project is currently undertaking the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for the
                     project. Further, as with all High risk projects, a panel of experts on Environmental and Social issues has been mobilized
                     for the project and already supporting the PMO . A panel of experts for dam safety, being mobilized in a calibrated
                     manner, will also be retained throughout the design and construction phase provide high level and professional
                     independent advice and guidance. MoE also has experience of working with ADB on Toktogul hydro power plant (HPP)
                     rehabilitation project, EBRD on some other small hydro projects as well as KfW and other development partners.


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                         High
                     For such a large HPP, environmental risks and potential impacts would include permanent inundation of the reservoir
                     area and changes in landscapes; alteration of flow in some stretches of the Naryn River, its water quality, and
                     hydromorphology, including sediment transport; and changes in terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity in ecosystems
                     dependent on it. Construction of Kambarata 1 HPP will involve significant civil works, including for ancillary facilities
                     like access roads and/or bridges, transmission infrastructure, and related facilities, which are expected to have
                     significant adverse and long-term impacts on the biophysical environment, if not managed well. Given the anticipated
                     scale of the works, air and noise pollution and vibration impacts from blasting and movement of heavy equipment
                     and waste disposal issues during construction are anticipated. Occupational and community health and safety risks



Public Disclosure
                     and impacts are also expected to be adverse and significant considering the large number of workers to be deployed
                     at the site during construction; the need for substantial movement of material and equipment during construction,
                     and substantial security measures to protect the large site. The works and inundation of the reservoir area are
                     expected to have potential adverse risks and impacts on both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and biodiversity,
                     including potential cumulative impacts and transboundary impacts. The variety of impacts of identified project
                     activities, which include irreversible impacts as well as those that would alter the natural flows and terrain
                     significantly, augmented further by the need for more robust management due to the complexities associated with
                     project impacts and implementation, even with the current familiarity and experience of the Borrower with ESF
                     requirements, have led to environmental risk being rated as High.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The envisioned social risks of the project refer to limited stakeholder engagement, project information disclosure, and
                     the need for an effective grievance mechanism for handling complaints. Labor influx is expected to be significant for
                     around 10 years, with a peak of 3,000 workers, creating challenges for this low-density area. Also, even if the initial
                     social screening has shown that there are only a few permanent human settlements in the dam site and impounded
                     area, every year, shepherd families move with their herds from villages to the pastures located in the project area,
                     where they stay for several months –in some areas of the valley from April to October, for spring and autumn
                     pastures; in others, from October to April, for winter pastures-. Because of it, the project would likely cause the
                     displacement of some structures used for seasonal animal husbandry and temporary residence, limit the use and
                     access to some seasonal pastures, potential economic displacement due to more limited of access to pasturelands for
                     communities living around the project area impacting local livelihoods, or the removal and changes of some local


                    Jan 02, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kambarata-1 Hpp: Sustainable And Transformational Energy Program (P509251)



                     infrastructures. Additional concerns coming from local stakeholders refer to the restoration of livelihoods (mainly
                     animal husbandry, but also others) and opportunities for benefit-sharing, including local job creation. The project
                     would require attention to labor management aspects, including working terms and conditions, OHS, and safe and
                     effective work camps; plus community health and safety issues, gender-based violence, SEA/SH, transmission of
                     disease and security issues. The project’s ancillary facilities and associated facilities are expected to traverse land
                     already owned by the Government. The project area has had human presence for millennia, with the presence of
                     cemeteries, holy sites, etc. Other risks may include impacts on livelihoods downstream, in particular, related to
                     domestic use, irrigation, and fishing.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      The project poses significant environmental and social risks, due to permanent inundation of the reservoir area,
                      alteration of river flow and water quality, on land and water based biodiversity, pasture use restriction, and labor
                      influx. Additionally, air and noise pollution, waste disposal, and occupational and community health and safety risks
                      are likely. Other impacts include on livelihoods downstream, such as water supply, irrigation, and fishing. An
                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), also covering associated facilities, is being undertaken. Its
                      Screening and scoping report is currently under review. The ESIA will include focused assessments and plans covering,
                      inter alia, Labor Influx and Community and Labor Safety, Pasture Management and Livelihood Restoration,



Public Disclosure
                      Cumulative Impacts, Biodiversity management, including Ecosystem Services, Cultural Heritage, etc. OP7.50 is
                      applicable as the Project will be located on the Syr Darya River, an international waterway.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      The early engagement and active participation of a wide range of stakeholders (local, national, and regional; public,
                      private, and CSOs) will be key to the Project's success. The Project's TA has financed the preparation of a Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP), which will summarize the consultation process and the public disclosure strategy to be
                      carried out during the preparation phase. Also, the SEP will define a consultation, information sharing, and grievance
                      management strategy during the Project's implementation phase. Early consultations with affected and interested
                      local and national-level stakeholders have shown their high expectations about mitigating potential negative socio-
                      environmental impacts and enhancing the Project's development benefits. The SEP will also include a GRM,
                      established by the Project's effective date, and provisions to address labor-related complaints and SEA/SH cases.
                      Consultations will be also undertaken with key stakeholders in Riparian Countries.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The construction phase is expected to have a substantial number of workers involved in the construction and
                      installation of equipment. Even if previous estimates reported a significant labor influx for ten years, with a peak of
                      3,000 workers, the actual number cannot be determined at this stage. It will be further estimated as part of the FS
                      and design studies. Therefore, the Project's TA is financing the preparation of the Project's Labor Management
                      Procedures (LMP), as well as an Occupational Health and Safety Plan to meet the requirements of the national labor


                    Jan 02, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kambarata-1 Hpp: Sustainable And Transformational Energy Program (P509251)



                      law, the ESS 2 and the WBG's Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines. The LMP will follow World Bank Group
                      guidelines in establishing and operating worker accommodations with the necessary standards of hygiene and safety.
                      Also, the LMP will stipulate safe working conditions and procedures (including OHS and measures to address SEA/SH
                      risks), workforce protection measures, and a labor grievance mechanism.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      The construction of Kambarata 1 HPP , will generate large volume of spoils/waste for disposal. It will also require a
                      large volume of resources and construction materials and will generate air and water pollutants during construction.
                      Key risks include air, water pollution, improper handling of hazardous materials, and hazardous waste. With Roller
                      Compacted Cement being the chosen dam type, embedded emissions in the dam body, as well as transport of
                      cement will need to be accounted for. GHG analysis will also need to be undertaken for material use and reservoir. All
                      such risks and impacts relevant to ESS 3 will be assessed in the ESIA and relevant measures and plans will be
                      developed to address these as part of the project. The ESIA will include assessment of environmental flows (e-flows)
                      using the IFC Good Practice Handbook on Environmental Flows for Hydropower Projects.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      During construction, the main risks relate to the impact of labor influx and potential GBV/SEA/SH in low-density rural
                      areas. Also, construction activities can introduce or exacerbate traffic hazards. To address such risks and impacts, the
                      ESIA and ESMP will also undertake an assessment and introduce mitigation measures to address work-related health
                      risks; works and road safety; excessive noise and dust, site safety and access restrictions; and GBV/SEA/SH. A Labor




Public Disclosure
                      Influx Management will be prepared to cover aspects of labor camps, relations with the community, safety and
                      workers welfare and proper living conditions, as well as security management. The already mobilized Dam Safety
                      Panel will review and advise on dam safety and other critical aspects of this new high dam in line with requirements
                      of Annex 1 of ESS4. E&S Panel of Experts is also established and providing critical review and inputs into the project
                      preparation.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      There are only a few permanent human settlements in the dam site and impounded area. However, every year,
                      shepherd families move with their herds from villages to the pastures located in the project area, where they stay for
                      several months. Because of it, the Project would likely cause the displacement of structures used for seasonal animal
                      husbandry, limit the use and access to some seasonal pastures, potential economic displacement due to more limited
                      of access to pasturelands, remove and change some local infrastructures, or livelihood impacts. The project’s ancillary
                      and associated facilities are expected to traverse land owned by the Government. To address ESS5-related impacts,
                      before the Bank's appraisal, the Project will prepare an RPF, including provisions for livelihood restoration activities.
                      In addition to screening the scope of land acquisition and livelihood impacts and preparing a budget estimate. After
                      appraisal, a site-specific RP will be prepared before implementation.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      HPP construction and operation can increase risk to biodiversity by water quality deterioration, changes to riparian
                      ecosystems, including hindrance to movement paths, changed flow regime, increased pressure on natural resources


                    Jan 02, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kambarata-1 Hpp: Sustainable And Transformational Energy Program (P509251)



                      and induced development. IBAT analysis indicates potential presence of one fish (sturgeon) and one bird (lapwing)
                      species that are Critically Endangered while and eight are Endangered. Presence of Snow Leopard will be investigated
                      in the project area following recent reports. Extraction of construction materials, from uncontrolled quarries along
                      riverside may also have adverse impact on biodiversity if not managed well. Sites-specific Biodiversity Assessment is
                      being undertaken as part of the ESIA being supported under the TA by qualified Biodiversity Specialists. A Biodiversity
                      Management Plan will be prepared, if required, to inform design, and bid documents. If needed, potential of
                      biodiversity offsets will also be assessed.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional              Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      There are no people in the project area that the meet the criteria of this standard.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                      Relevant

                      The project area has had human presence for millennia, with cemeteries, animal burials, cultural heritage, holy sites,
                      and Mazars, so the project's ESIA/ESMP currently under preparation will include a Cultural Heritage Management
                      Plan. It will also include a chance finds procedure to address potential risks and impacts on any tangible and
                      intangible cultural heritage are being studied and explored as part of the consultations to confirm whether these are
                      adversely impacted due to inundation, access restriction and/or resettlement.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      This is not a FI operation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                       Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            No



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             TBD
                       While ADB, AIIB, EIB, IsDB, Islamic Funds, OPEC Fund and other development partners have joined the donor
                       coordination committee and may support the construction of Kambarata 1 through financing of works and
                       equipment, discussions have not yet been initiated on this aspect.




                    Jan 02, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Kambarata-1 Hpp: Sustainable And Transformational Energy Program (P509251)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Draft ESIA and /ESMP (including several issue specific plans), a RPF, (including provisions for livelihood restoration
                     activities), an LMP, a SEP -including a project's GRM, to be prepared, consulted, and disclosed prior Bank's Appraisal.
                     After the Bank's Appraisal, a site-specific RP will be prepared, consulted, and disclosed before the project's
                     implementation. The ESCP will be ready with the draft ESIA, RPF, LMP, and SEP at the time of Appraisal.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Maksudjon Safarov                        Title:          Senior Energy Specialist

                      Email:                  msafarov@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Aleix Serrat Capdevila                   Job Title:      Senior Water Resources Specialist

                      Email:                  aserratcapdevila@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                 Maksudjon Safarov, Aleix Serrat Capdevila

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                        Gaurav Dilipkumar Joshi

                     ADM Social Specialist:                               David Jorge Baringo Ezquerra




                    Jan 02, 2025                                                                                                      Page 9 of 9
