Public Disclosure Authorized
                               İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities                    SEP




                                İLBANK A.Ş.




Public Disclosure Authorized     Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) - Green and Future Cities
                                                     Project - P509293

                                                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                          February 2026




                                                                                           Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities                                                                                                               SEP



      Table of Contents

List of Tables ........................................................................................................................................... ii
List of Abbreviations and Acronyms ..................................................................................................... iii
Executive Summary .................................................................................................................................v
1. Introduction ..........................................................................................................................................7
2. Description of SEP ...............................................................................................................................8
3. Regulations and Requirements .............................................................................................................9
   3.1. National Legislation for Stakeholder Engagement ........................................................................9
   3.2. World Bank Requirements for Stakeholder Engagement............................................................10
4. Stakeholder Engagement Program .....................................................................................................12
   4.1. Stakeholder Identification and Analysis ......................................................................................12
   4.2. Key Principles of Stakeholder Engagement ................................................................................13
   4.3. Methods for Stakeholder Engagement ........................................................................................13
   4.4. Proposed Strategy for Including Views of Vulnerable Groups ...................................................17
   4.5. Timing of Stakeholder Engagement ............................................................................................18
5. Institutional Arrangements for Stakeholder Engagement ...........................................................21
6. Grievance Mechanism ........................................................................................................................25
   6.1. Project Specific Grievance Mechanism (for İLBANK and the Municipalities)..........................25
   6.2. Workers’ Grievance Mechanism .................................................................................................27
6.3. Management of Sensitive Grievances (Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual
Harassment issues) ............................................................................................................................28
6.4. World Bank Grievance Redress System..................................................................................29
7. Monitoring and Reporting ..................................................................................................................30
   7.1. Summary of How SEP Implementation will be Monitored and Reported ..................................30




                                                                              i


                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



     List of Tables

-   Table 1. Stakeholder Groups for GFC Project .............................................................................. 13
-   Table 2. Engagement Methods to be Employed under the Project ............................................... 14
-   Table 3. The Overview of the Stakeholder Engagement Program ............................................... 16
-   Table 4. Summary of Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals/Groups and Suggested Stakeholder
Engagement Methods ............................................................................................................................ 17
-   Table 5. Responsible Parties for SEP Implementation ................................................................. 22
-   Table 6. Categories of Worker Complaints................................................................................... 28
-   Table 7. Sample Key Performance Indicators by Project Phase ................................................... 30




                                                                                                                                  ii | P a g e

                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



    List of Abbreviations and Acronyms

AMM               Antalya Metropolitan Municipality
ASAT              Antalya Water and Sewerage Administration
E&S               Environmental and Social
ESCP              Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF               Environmental and Social Framework
ESIA              Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMF              Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESMP              Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESMU              Environmental and Social Management Unit
ESS               Environmental and Social Standard
FI                Financial Intermediary
GFC               Green and Future Cities
GHG               greenhouse gas
GM                Grievance Mechanism
GRS               Grievance Redress Service
İLBANK            İller Bankası A.Ş.
KMM               Konya Metropolitan Municipality
KOSKI             Konya Water and Sewerage Administration
LMP               Labor Management Procedures
MoEUCC            Ministry of Environment, Urbanization and Climate Change
MoTF              Ministry of Treasury and Finance
NbS               Nature-based Solutions
NGO               Non-governmental Organization
OIP               Other Interested Parties
PAP               Project Affected Parties
PDO               Project Development Objective
PIU               Project Implementation Unit
POM               Project Operation Manual
RF                Resettlement Framework
RP                Resettlement Plan
SoAI              Social Area of Influence
SBB               Presidency of Strategy and Budget
SEP               Stakeholder Engagement Plan
WB                World Bank




                                                                             iii | P a g e

                                                                                      Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



GLOSSARY

 Grievance Mechanism: It is a mechanism that has been developed for potential use by project
 stakeholders to achieve mutually agreed resolutions for their grievances. It ensures that
 complaints and grievances are addressed through a transparent and impartial process.
 Implementing Agency: Refers to the İller Bankasi A.S (İLBANK), which will assume overall
 responsibility for the project.
 Project: Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project.
 PIUs: Refers to the staff of PIUs to be established for each of the municipalities benefiting under
 the Project.
 ESMU: Refers to the staff of the Environmental and Social Management Unit (ESMU),
 established under the İLBANK International Relations Group Department.
 Stakeholder: Refers to individuals or groups who: (a) are affected or likely to be affected by the
 project (project-affected parties); and (b) may get involved directly or/and have an interest in the
 project (other interested parties).
 Stakeholder Engagement: It is a continuous process used by the project to engage relevant
 stakeholders to generate sense of ownership to the project and for a clear purpose to achieve
 accepted outcomes. It includes a range of activities and interactions over the life of the project
 such as stakeholder identification and analysis, information disclosure, stakeholder consultation,
 negotiations and partnerships, grievance management, stakeholder involvement in project
 monitoring, reporting to stakeholders and management functions. It includes both state and non-
 state actors.
 Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): A SEP is a tool for managing communications with the
 project stakeholders at the sub-project or activity level. The SEP will describe the timing and
 methods of engagement with stakeholders throughout the life cycle of the project as agreed
 between Bank and Borrower, distinguishing between project-affected parties and other interested
 parties. The SEP will also describe the range and timing of information to be communicated to
 project-affected parties and other interested parties, as well as the type of information to be sought
 from them. When a project consists of a program and/or series of sub-projects and the
 stakeholders/stakeholder engagement program cannot be identified in detail until the
 program/sub-project details have been identified, the SEP may be prepared initially as a
 framework instrument.
 Project Level SEP: The SEP prepared by İLBANK ESMU which guides İLBANK’s own efforts
 at stakeholder engagement as well as providing a framework to guide the preparation of individual
 sub-project specific SEPs by the PIUs.
 Sub-Project Specific SEPs: SEPs will be prepared by each PIUs for each sub-projects that
 reference the Project Level SEP.




                                                                                                iv | P a g e

                                                                                                          Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



    Executive Summary

The Green and Future Cities (GFC) Project (hereinafter referred to as “the Project”) is designed to
support the development of sustainable and climate-resilient cities across Türkiye. It focuses on key
sectors such as public transportation, water and sanitation, renewable energy, and energy efficiency.
Through these investments, the Project aims to improve urban livability, operational efficiency, and
overall productivity, while increasing cities’ ability to withstand the impacts of climate change.

İLBANK acts as a financial intermediary (FI) in projects, providing sub-project loans and
implementation support to municipalities and their affiliated utilities. İLBANK has established an
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), which entered into force on December 24,
2023, and became fully operational in August 2024. The ESMS is aligned with the World Bank’s
Environmental and Social Framework (ESF, 2018), including its Environmental and Social Standards
(ESSs).

The SEP has been prepared in accordance with the World Bank's ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and
Information Sharing and İLBANK’s ESMS. This SEP provides a framework to support the
establishment of a continuous engagement process between municipalities and those who potentially
would be impacted or have any kind of interest in the Project (stakeholders). Besides, it will also help
to manage stakeholder expectations and support the management of risks, and therefore reducing
potential conflicts and project delays by providing early, frequent and open communication throughout
the life of the project. This SEP also will be a framework for SEPs to be prepared for sub-projects.

This Document is a “Project level” SEP prepared by İLBANK, which guides İLBANK’s own efforts at
stakeholder engagement as well as providing a framework to guide the preparation of individual sub-
project level SEPs by the municipalities/utilities.

This SEP explains the stakeholder engagement process, including the identification and analysis, key
principles, method and proposed strategy for vulnerable groups. The potential stakeholder groups have
been identified, and their level of interest and level of influence have been analyzed. The engagement
activities will be carried out in a culturally appropriate manner and will include best practice approaches
to interact with stakeholder groups so that the project may establish effective relationships for
stakeholder engagement. All information regarding the Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project (GFC)
will be made accessible on İLBANK’s, municipalities’ and the WB's official websites. Within the scope
of the project, brochures, leaflets, booklets and/or posters will also be developed to inform stakeholders
about the project activities.
It is of particular importance to understand whether project impacts disproportionately affect
disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups who are often unable to raise their concerns or
understand the impacts of a project. Interaction with vulnerable groups and individuals often requires
special measures and assistance to ensure that these groups and individuals are well aware of the overall
process and their contribution to the process is in balance with other stakeholders and focused on
establishing their participation.

Stakeholder engagement is an on-going process that spans throughout the life of the project starting
from planning and design, construction, operation until the end of decommissioning. The ESMU in
İLBANK will be responsible for the overall implementation of the GFC Project, including the
implementation of the SEP.




                                                                                                v|Page

                                                                                                       Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



İLBANK has established a transparent and comprehensive GM in September 2021 in order to receive,
evaluate and address grievances pertaining to every international project it finances, and relevant
mechanism will be in place during the course of the Project.




                                                                                        vi | P a g e

                                                                                                Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities                                                              SEP



1. Introduction

This Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is developed to define a program for stakeholder engagement,
including public information disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle of the Green
and Future Cities Project (GFC) (P509293) which will be financed by the World Bank. The Project aims
to support participating municipalities and utilities in Türkiye to improve access to sustainable and
resilient municipal infrastructure and services, thereby enhancing climate resilience and energy
efficiency. İller Bankası A.Ş. (İLBANK) will act as a Financial Intermediary (FI) and the participating
municipalities will be implementing the Project activities.

The proposed Project is anticipated to have three components: (i) Integrated, multi-sectoral investments
in participating municipalities; (ii) Strengthening capacity of İLBANK and municipalities in municipal
finance and urban management for future investment projects; and (iii) Project Management.

Component 1. Integrated, multi-sectoral investments in participating municipalities: This
component will support demand-driven municipal investments contributing to more livable, productive,
and resilient urban development in the participating municipalities. It will finance civil works, goods,
consulting and non-consulting services for, inter alia, review and quality assurance of technical designs
prepared by municipalities and construction supervision as needed by each municipality. Eligible
investments under this component will fall under the following categories:

1. Urban Transport: construction or rehabilitation of resilient mass transit systems (such as tramlines
and associated facilities); purchase of public transport vehicles (such as trams, electric and CNG buses);
construction of non-motorized transport infrastructure; establishment of digital systems; road safety
improvements; establishment of evacuation routes and emergency corridors; improvements for
universal accessibility; and integrated greening along transport corridors. Investments will focus on
supporting a modal shift towards sustainable mobility modes and improving access to main urban
centers and, thus, their markets and employment opportunities.

2. Water and Sanitation: construction and rehabilitation of resilient drinking water, sewage, and
stormwater networks, transmission lines, water tanks, pumping stations, and water and wastewater
treatment plants; and purchase of goods for related municipal services.

3. Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency: construction of distributed renewable energy plants
from sources such as solar and geothermal; energy efficiency improvements in municipal infrastructure
services and onsite energy generation for utilities.

Component 2. Strengthening capacity of İLBANK and municipalities in municipal finance and urban
management for future investment projects: The component will support İLBANK and municipalities
to build institutional and technical capacity in municipal finance and urban management to prepare
integrated municipal infrastructure and financing plans. The component will support a next cohort of
municipalities to develop investment plans and sub-project pipelines for future financing, advance
creditworthiness, and prepare technical (Project Information Documents (PIDs), technical designs,
design reviews), environmental, and social studies for potential sub-projects for the next project under
the series of projects (SOP). The component will also explore innovative ways of using available WBG
financing instruments with İLBANK, including guarantees and blended financing, and of facilitating
access to private capital to support municipalities with a broader package of financing for future
municipal infrastructure investments. The component will target municipalities participating under this
Project and potentially benefiting under subsequent projects.


                                                                                               7|Page


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



Component 3. Project Management: This component will finance provision of goods, consulting and
non-consulting services, operating costs and training to ILBANK for project management and
implementation support activities, including inter-alia, procurement, financial management,
environmental and social compliance, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, grievance redress,
stakeolder engagement, communications and outreach.

2. Description of SEP

The Project is being prepared under the World Bank's Environment and Social Framework (ESF). Per
Environmental and Social Standard ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure, the
implementing agencies should provide stakeholders with timely, relevant, understandable, and
accessible information, and consult with them in a culturally appropriate manner, which is free of
manipulation, interference, coercion, discrimination, or intimidation.

İLBANK has established an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) that entered into
force on December 24, 2023. The ESMS aims to systematically identify, assess, manage, monitor and
report environmental and social (E&S) risks and impacts of projects and sub-projects financed by
International Financial Institutions (IFIs). As a critical element of the ESMS, İLBANK has adopted and
published an E&S Policy that applies to all İLBANK projects and sub-projects financed through IFIs.
Because this project is managed according to the procedures of İLBANK ESMS, the project activities,
including stakeholder engagement activities, will be implemented under ESMS.

This SEP outlines the ways in which the project team will communicate with stakeholders and includes
a mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about project
activities or any activities related to the project. While this SEP presents İLBANK’s own efforts at
stakeholder engagement and grievance mechanism, it should be also considered as a framework to guide
the subproject specific SEPs that will be prepared by participating municipalities/utilities.

This SEP should be read together with other plans prepared for the Project, including the, İLBANK
Environmental and Social Management System Summary, and the Environmental and Social
Commitment Plan (ESCP).




                                                                                           8|Page

                                                                                                  Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



3. Regulations and Requirements

          3.1. National Legislation for Stakeholder Engagement

Right to Information Act (No. 4982)

The purpose of this law is to regulate the procedure and basis of the right to information in accordance
with the principles of equality, impartiality and openness, which are the requirements of a democratic
and transparent government. According to the obligation to provide information (Article5), institutions
and organizations are required to take necessary administrative and technical measures for all kinds of
information and documents, considering the exceptions set out in this law, to provide information to
applicants; and to evaluate and decide on applications promptly, effectively and correctly.

Law on the Exercise of the Right to Petition

Based on "Article 3 of the Law on the Exercise of the Right to Petition", citizens of the Republic of
Türkiye, may submit their complaints to the Grand National Assembly of Türkiye through written
petition (Official Gazette dated 01.11.1984 and numbered 3071). On the condition of reciprocity and
using Turkish language in their petitions, foreigners residing in Türkiye are entitled to enjoy this right.

Constitution of the Republic of Türkiye

Stakeholder engagement is secured by the Constitution of the Republic of Türkiye. The Constitution
contains provisions that ensure that people can freely express their views. Article 25 of the Turkish
Constitution is the article "Freedom of thought and opinion". According to this article, nobody can be
forced to express their thoughts and convictions for whatever reason and purpose; cannot be condemned
or accused because of his thoughts and convictions. As emphasized by the "Freedom to Explain and
Spread Thought (Article 26 of the Constitution of the Republic of Türkiye)"; everyone has the right to
express and disseminate their thoughts and opinions individually or collectively by word, text, picture
or other means. This article also covers the freedom to receive or impart information or ideas without
the intervention of the official authorities. At the same time, everyone has the "Right to Petition" (Article
74 of the Constitution of the Republic of Türkiye). Accordingly, the principle of reciprocity citizens and
foreigners residing in Türkiye on condition that observance, on their own or with the wishes and
complaints about public authorities and Türkiye has the right to appeal in writing to the National
Assembly.
The Presidency’s Communication Center (CİMER) is an official government tool used to receive
requests, complaints and applications from the public. Communication channels of CİMER are as
follows:
            Website               https://www.cimer.gov.trhttps://giris.turkiye.gov.tr/
            Hotline               150
            Post Address          T.C. Cumhurbaşkanlığı Külliyesi 06560 Beştepe – Ankara
            Telephone             +90 312 590 2000
            Fax                   +90 312 473 6494

Public institutions and organizations shall provide the requested information within 15 working days. If
the requested information or document is to be obtained from another unit within the relevant institution
or if the opinion of another institution is required or the content of the application pertains to more than
one institution; the access shall be provided within 30 working days. In this case, the applicant shall be
informed in writing about the extension and its reasons within 15 working days (Article 11).


                                                                                                 9|Page

                                                                                                         Official Use Only
 İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



 Regulation on Environmental Impact Assessment

 The Environmental Law No. 2872, which was published in the Turkish Official Gazette No. 18132 dated
 11 August 1983 and amended in the Official Gazette dated 29 Mays 2013 (by Law No. 6486), establishes
 the underlying legal framework of the environmental legislation in Türkiye and is supported by a large
 number of regulations. Article 10 of the Environmental Law constitutes the main framework of the
 Environmental Impact Assessment Regulation (EIA Regulation) published in the Official Gazette No.
 31907 dated 29 July 2022.
 Within the scope of EIA, for the projects included in the Annex-I list, a public participation meeting
 (PPM) will be organized by the bodies and organizations authorized by the Ministry of Environment,
 Urbanization and Climate Change (MoEUCC) with the participation of the project owner on the date
 set by the MoEUCC and at the place and time determined by the Governor's Office before the Committee
 determines the scope to inform the public about the investment and to hear their opinions and
 suggestions regarding the project.

           3.2. World Bank Requirements for Stakeholder Engagement

 World Bank Requirements

 The Environmental and Social Standard (ESS) 10 "Stakeholder Engagement and Information
 Disclosure" of the World Bank's Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) recognizes, " the
 importance of open and transparent engagement between the Borrower (İLBANK ESMU) and project
 stakeholders as an essential element of good international practice." In more detail, the requirements set
 out by ESS10 are as follow:
    1.    “Borrowers will engage with stakeholders throughout the project life cycle, commencing
          such engagement as early as possible in the project development process and in a
          timeframe that enables meaningful consultations with stakeholders on project design. The
          nature, scope and frequency of stakeholder engagement will be proportionate to the nature
          and scale of the project and its potential risks and impacts”
    2.    “Borrowers will engage in meaningful consultations with all stakeholders. Borrowers will
          provide stakeholders with timely, relevant, understandable, and accessible information,
          and consult with them in a culturally appropriate manner, which is free of manipulation,
          interference, coercion, discrimination and intimidation.”
    3.    “The process of stakeholder engagement will involve the following, as set out in further
          detail in this ESS: (i) stakeholder identification and analysis; (ii) planning how the
          engagement with stakeholders will take place; (iii) disclosure of information; (iv)
          consultation with stakeholders; (v) addressing and responding to grievances; and (vi)
          reporting to stakeholders.”
    4.    “The Borrower will maintain and disclose as part of the environmental and social
          assessment, a documented record of stakeholder engagement, including a description of
          the stakeholders consulted, a summary of the feedback received and a brief explanation of
          how the feedback was taken into account, or the reasons why it was not.” (World Bank,
          2017: 98)”.
İLBANK ESMU is the “Borrower” and Municipalities/Utilities will be the “Sub-Borrower”. İLBANK
will ensure that Municipalities/Utilities will apply the relevant World Bank Requirements for the
implementation of sub-project specific SEPs.
SEPs specific to sub-projects should be prepared in line with the above-mentioned principles and
guidelines provided within this Project Level SEP. In addition to this SEP guiding İLBANK’s own efforts
at stakeholder engagement, it is also a framework to guide the preparation of individual sub-project
specific SEPs. The sub-project specific SEPs will be developed proportionate to the nature and scale of
the project, as well as its possible risks and impacts.

                                                                                              10 | P a g e

                                                                                                       Official Use Only
 İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



The Borrower will be responsible to respond to the suggestions and grievances raised by the project
affected parties regarding the environmental and social performance of the project in a timely manner.
To this end, the Borrower will propose and implement a grievance mechanism (GM) to receive and
facilitate resolution of suggestions and complaints. The scope, scale and type of the required GM will be
proportionate to the nature and scale of the potential risks and impacts of the project. The GM may
include: (i) enable submission of grievance and concerns in person, by phone, e-mail and/or website,
including the option to submit grievances anonymously; (ii) a log where grievances are registered in
writing and maintained as a database; (iii) publicly advertised procedures, setting out the length of time
users can expect to wait for acknowledgement, response and resolution of their grievances; (iv)
transparency about the grievance procedure, governing structure and decision makers; (v) an appeals
process (including the national judiciary) to which unsatisfied grievances may be referred when resolution
of grievance has not been achieved.




                                                                                             11 | P a g e

                                                                                                      Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



4. Stakeholder Engagement Program

Based on this SEP, municipalities/utilities will need to prepare a project specific SEP. In doing so, they
will follow the below mentioned process.



          4.1. Stakeholder Identification and Analysis

Once the sub-projects’ footprints are determined, the primary step in stakeholder engagement process
will be to identify the Project’s stakeholders. In identifying the stakeholders, municipalities will also
determine the needs and expectations for engagement, including their priorities and objectives in relation
to the Project. After the identification of stakeholders, municipalities will choose the best engagement
method and tool to engage with each stakeholder.
There may be individuals and groups who may be disproportionately affected or further disadvantaged
by the project(s) compared to all other groups due to their vulnerable status, and that may require specific
engagement efforts in consultation and decision-making to ensure their equal representation in the
consultation and decision-making process associated with the project. Therefore, it is important that
municipalities/utilities investigate the impacts and risks of their sub-projects on different stakeholder
groups including vulnerable groups. The engagement method should be tailored to each identified
stakeholder groups ensuring their involvement in the project.
This project level SEP and the subproject specific SEPs are living documents, like other ESF
instruments, which can be updated and revised according to changing circumstances of the project and
sub-projects. Stakeholders identified in the design phase of a project may change during implementation
and therefore will need to be updated accordingly. The identification and analysis of the stakeholders
should be performed as early as possible in the project life cycle, taking into account the dynamics
between stakeholders and the risks and opportunities of their involvement in the Project, and should:
    •    Categorize stakeholders in accordance with their level of impact and interest in the
         project/sub-projects. Stakeholders will be defined in line with the ESS10 as;
         -        Stakeholders are affected or likely to be affected by the project (project-affected
                  parties),
         -        Stakeholder may have an interest in the project (other interested parties)
         -        Vulnerable groups
    • Present how each stakeholder group (vulnerable groups, individuals, organizations,
         government institutions, etc.) will be affected by the project and how will influence the Project
         – directly or indirectly; through taking into account:
         -        the area of influence; geographical location where anticipated impacts (both positive
                  and negative) will occur, and therefore the localities within which people and
                  businesses could be affected, and
         -        the nature of the impacts that could arise and therefore the types of national/local
                  government entities, NGOs, academic and research institutions and other bodies who
                  may have an interest in these issues.
Depending on the magnitude of impact and influence of the sub-project on the stakeholders, and vice
versa, the frequency and scope of the engagement methods will proportionally change. The sub-project
SEP will provide information on vulnerable groups (if any) such as women, elderly, people with
disabilities, refugees, seasonal workers etc. All engagement methods selected should avoid
manipulation, interference and intimidation, and will be carried out by providing timely, relevant,
understandable and accessible information in a culturally appropriate way for each of the different


                                                                                               12 | P a g e

                                                                                                        Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



stakeholder group targeted. Error! Reference source not found. below summarizes the potential
interests and influence for each of the affected parties mentioned above.
-         Table 1. Stakeholder Groups for GFC Project

    Component
                                                                                   Level of    Level of
                                                                                   Interest   Influence
    Stakeholder Group
                             •    Municipalities
      Project Affected       •    Utilities                                         High         High
          Parties            •    Local businesses
                             •    Local community organizations                   Medium       Medium
                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                             i
                             •    Project Affected People                                       High
                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                             h
                             •    Disabled individuals
Vulnerable individuals       •    Elderly individuals
                                                                                    High         High
or groups                    •    Immigrants, refugees and non-native Turkish
                                  speakers
                             •    NGOs
                             •    Media                                            Medium      Medium
Other Interested
                             •    Public institutions
Parties
                             •    Professional associations
                                                                                    High         High
                             •    Local administrators

            4.2. Key Principles of Stakeholder Engagement

The project level SEP and relevant sub-project specific SEPs to be prepared will ensure that the
following key principles are applied to all engagement activities:
      •   The timing and number of engagement activities is designed to maximize stakeholder
          involvement while avoiding disruption of the ‘daily businesses of local stakeholders in
          particular as well as avoiding ‘consultation fatigue
      •   All engagement activities are in line with project specific SEP schedule and parallel to the
          commitments made in ESMPs and also RPs if any.
      •   Ensure that all engagement activities are recorded and findings/feedback that require any action
          to be taken is incorporated to relevant documents, shared with responsible parties and followed
          up in a timely manner
      •   Ensure that every engagement activity is culturally appropriate, sufficient and disseminated in
          a timely manner with equal access to all relevant stakeholders allowing for their increased
          participation and feedback
      •   Project specific SEPs are updated as required during the project life cycle.

            4.3. Methods for Stakeholder Engagement

A variety of engagement techniques will be utilized to engage and consult with stakeholders, as well as
to gather information from and deliver information to stakeholders.
The level of impact, in addition to the needs and concerns of the stakeholders will determine the basis
of the communication tools and methods selected to engage with certain groups. Anticipated
engagement methods and means of application for possible stakeholders of the Project are presented in
Table 2 below. These methods and tools are identified in line with the currently available project

                                                                                              13 | P a g e

                                                                                                        Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



information and need to be revised accordingly while preparing the project specific SEPs. The language
of communication throughout the Project is expected to be Turkish; however, different languages will
be also taken into consideration, if need be, to increase the efficiency of the engagement activities and
ensure involvement of all stakeholder groups. The engagement activities will be carried out in a
culturally appropriate manner and will include best approaches to interact with stakeholder groups that
establish effective relationships for stakeholder engagement.
-           Table 2. Engagement Methods to be Employed under the Project
        Engagement Method              Application/Purpose of the Method                       Target Stakeholder

                                  -   Information sharing (in particular technical)
                                      on project requirements and impacts               Other relevant state authorities and
                                  -   Invitations to meetings and key events            government officials, NGOs, local
    Correspondences (Letters,         during project implementation
                                                                                        government, academia, national
    Phone, Emails)                -   Arrangements for obtaining permits,
                                      licences, transfer, and allocation of project     and local media and
                                      land                                              organisations/agencies
                                  -   Information and data requests that will be
                                      utilized for project implementation
                                                                                        Representatives of relevant state
                                  -   Information collection on an individual basis     authorities and government
                                      allowing stakeholders to voice their              officials, NGOs, local government,
    One-on-one meetings
                                      concerns/opinions about sensitive issues          academia, and
                                  -   Establishing personal connections with key        organisations/agencies, contractors
                                      actors                                            and consultants

                                  -   Collective information sharing on project         Different national and local
                                      requirements and impacts                          government authorities and
    Formal meetings               -   Receiving comments, feedback, views and           officials, NGOs, academia, and
                                      perception of project from a group of public      organisations/agencies, national
                                      institutions                                      and local media
                                  -   Establishing relations with public institutions
                                  -   Information sharing (especially non-
                                      technical) to a large group of stakeholders,
                                                                                        Any stakeholder group identified
                                      especially communities about the scope and
                                      timeline of the Project and sub-project           throughout the project including
                                      activities.                                       the affected communities and
                                  -   Receiving comments, feedback, views and           groups, local NGOs, national and
    Consultation meetings
                                      perception of project from a group of             local government
                                      stakeholders                                      representatives/authorities,
                                  -   Collecting grievances and concerns related        businesses, organisations/agencies,
                                      to the project
                                                                                        etc.
                                  -   Establishing relations with affected
                                      communities, and groups

                                  -   Collecting baseline data on an individual         PAPs, project workers (including
                                      basis with regard to project-affected people      workers to be employed for the
                                      (PAPs) impacted by the project                    construction activities, ESMU and
    Face to face interviews
                                  -   Understanding, monitoring and assessing the       PIU staff, contracted workers,
                                      project activities’ environmental and social      etc.), vulnerable/disadvantaged
                                      impacts and risks on an individual basis          groups/people,
                                  -   Establishing relations on an individual basis
                                  -   Sharing project relevant information and
                                      update on progress                                Any stakeholder group identified
                                  -   Disclosing project/subproject related             throughout the project including
    Project/Municipality/İLBANK       documentation and communication tools:            affected communities and PAPs,
    website                           ESMP, RP, Ex-Post social audit document,          national and local media,
                                      grievance mechanism (GM), presentations,          academia, NGOs, businesses and
                                      brochures, etc.                                   organisations/agencies
                                  -   Announcements of key events (date/time,
                                      venue)

                                                                                                               14 | P a g e

                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



     Engagement Method                 Application/Purpose of the Method                      Target Stakeholder

 Digital communication tools
                                                                                       Any stakeholder group identified
 social media (Facebook,
                                                                                       throughout the project including
 Twitter, Instagram accounts,     -   Non-technical information sharing and            affected communities and PAPs,
 WhatsApp groups),                    progress updates
                                                                                       national and local media,
 national/local television        -   Announcements of key events, dates and
                                      published documents related with the Project     academia, NGOs, businesses and
 channels, radio stations, SMS,
                                                                                       organisations/agencies
 etc.

                                  -   Sharing brief project information to provide
                                      regular update                                   Any stakeholder group identified
                                  -   Informing the stakeholders on certain issues     throughout the project including
 Project information
                                      such as land acquisition, land entry and exit,   affected communities and PAPs,
 brochures/leaflets
                                      project implementation schedule, scope of        businesses and
                                      project activities and subprojects, etc.         organisations/agencies
                                  -   Disseminating site-specific project
                                      information
                                  -   Information sharing on a specific topic to a
                                      group of people including vulnerable groups
                                  -   Receiving comments, feedback, views and
                                      perception regarding the project from a          Any stakeholder group identified
 Online meeting (alternative          certain group                                    throughout the project, including
 tool if needed)                  -   Collecting grievances, concerns and              project affected people, vulnerable
                                      feedback related to the project from a group     groups, etc.
                                  -   Monitoring project activities’ environmental
                                      and social impacts and risks on a group
                                  -   Establishing relations with local
                                      communities
                                  -   Receiving and resolving any requests (such
                                      as suggestions, complaints, compliments,         Any stakeholder group identified
 Grievance Mechanism (GM)
                                      inquires for information or whistle-blower       throughout the project
                                      complaints) received by all project
                                      stakeholders

All information regarding the GFC will be made accessible on İLBANK’s, municipalities’ and WB's
official websites. Within the scope of the project, brochures, leaflets, booklets and/or posters will also
be developed to inform stakeholders about the project activities.
The ESMU and PIUs will be responsible for the sharing, delivering and announcing of project/sub-
project documents, communication materials and GM.
In the light of information given in the previous paragraphs, the summary of the stakeholder engagement
program is given in Table 3.




                                                                                                             15 | P a g e

                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities                                                                              SEP



-          Table 3. The Overview of the Stakeholder Engagement Program

     Project Phase         Consultation            List of information           Method Used                      Target Stakeholder                 Frequency          Responsible
                       Subject/Message to be         to be disclosed                                                                                                       Party
                             delivered
      Preparation     • Inform the stakeholders    • Project concept,    • Opening meeting                   • Project-affected stakeholders     Before the            • İLBANK
                        about the scope and need     E&S principles      • Public announcements                (direct/indirect)                 commencement of       • PIUs
                        of the Project.              and obligations     • Non-technical project             • Disadvantaged/                    component
                      • Consult the stakeholders   • ESF documents         summaries/presentations             Vulnerable individuals or         activities
                        about                        (ESCP, Sub-         • Electronic publications             groups
                          o project design,          Project Specific    • Social media                      • Other interested parties          Throughout the
                          o environmental and        SEPs)               • Press releases                                                        project lifecycle
                              social risks and                           • Consultation meetings
                              impacts,                                     (virtual/face-to-face)
                          o proposed                                     • Digital communication tools
                              mitigation
                                                                         • Grievance Mechanism
                              measures,
                                                                         • Poster, brochure, leaflet, etc.
                      • GMs
                                                                         • SMS
    Implementation    • Inform the stakeholders    • ESMPs               • Public announcements              • Project-affected stakeholders     Prior to start of     • İLBANK
          &             about the project scope    • Sub-Project         • Non-technical project               (direct/indirect)Disadvantaged/   implementation of     • PIUs
     Construction       and ongoing activities       Specific SEPs         summaries/presentations             Vulnerable individuals or         the project, and as   • Supervision
                      • E&S documents              • RPs                 • Electronic publications             groups                            needed during the       Consultants
                        (ESMPs, RPs, Sub-          • GM procedure        • Social media                      • Other interested parties          project lifecycle     • Contractors
                        Project Specific SEPs,     • Regular updates     • Press releases
                        etc.)                        on Project          • Consultation meetings
                      • GMs                          development/          (virtual/face-to-face)
                                                     implementation      • Digital communication tools
                                                                         • Grievance Mechanism
                                                                         • Poster, brochure, leaflet, etc.
                                                                         • SMS
    Operation         • GMs                        • Project outputs     • Closing Meeting                   • Project-affected stakeholders     After completion      • İLBANK
                                                   • Redress of          • Consultation meetings               (direct/indirect)Disadvantaged/   of sub-project        • PIUs
                                                     grievances          • Disclosure meetings,                Vulnerable individuals or         activities, during
                                                                         • Digital Communication               groups                            the one-year
                                                                           Tools/social media                • Other interested parties          warranty period
                                                                         • Poster, brochure, leaflet, etc.
                                                                         • SMS




                                                                                                                                                                           16 | P a g e


                                                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities                                                                              SEP



          4.4. Proposed Strategy for Including Views of Vulnerable Groups

It is of particular importance to understand whether project impacts disproportionately affect
disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups who are often unable to raise their concerns or
understand the impacts of a project. Awareness raising and stakeholder engagement activities regarding
the project should be implemented taking into account the special constraints and cultural sensitivities
of these groups and individuals so that they fully understand the project activities and benefits.
Interaction with vulnerable groups and individuals often requires special measures and assistance to
ensure that these groups and individuals are well aware of the overall process and their contribution to
the process is in balance with other stakeholders and focused on establishing their participation.
Within the scope of this Project, vulnerable individuals and groups can be disabled individuals, elderly
individuals, and immigrants, refugees and non-native Turkish speakers. These groups in particular are
experiencing certain disadvantages in benefitting from public services and are likely to be directly
affected by sub-projects. These vulnerable groups will be defined in the SEPs of each particular sub-
projects.
Table 4 summarizes the disadvantaged/vulnerable individual/group identification carried out for the
project as well as the suggested stakeholder engagement methods for each disadvantaged/vulnerable
individual/groups
-      Table 4. Summary of Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals/Groups and Suggested
Stakeholder Engagement Methods

            Vulnerable                                              Preferred method for
                                                                                                Additional
            Groups and                  Features/Needs              information sharing
                                                                                             Resource Support
            Individuals                                               and consultation

                                                                   Audio devices,
                                                                   accessible platforms,
                                                                   etc. special training
                                                                                           Special education
                                                                   needs                   coordinators, sign
                               Individuals with the potential to
        Disabled individuals   be more affected by project         Large print Braille     language
                               work                                Daytime meeting         translators/interpreters
                                                                   Written information,    Braille
                                                                   Phone,
                                                                   Face to face
                               Lack of knowledge and
                                                                   Communication
                               inexperience about accessibility,
        Elderly individuals                                        methods in accessible   Not necessary
                               online tools, services and
                                                                   areas
                               communication channels
        Immigrants,                                                Translated documents,
        refugees and non-      Those who have difficulties in      special translators,
                                                                                           Translators
        native Turkish         communication                       communication in
        speakers                                                   accessible areas


To include the views of vulnerable groups:
    •   Engagements will be carried out with regional organizations and NGOs representing the rights
        of persons with disabilities;
    •   Separate consultations will be conducted for elderly individuals and disabled individuals (or
        people with additional accessibility needs), immigrants, refugees and non-native Turkish
        speakers, and other disadvantaged/vulnerable groups who may be identified during the
        project;




                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



    •    Information on the project will be provided face to face or by any other appropriate method
         specific to disadvantaged/vulnerable groups/individuals to be specified or specified (e.g.
         visually impaired alphabet, sign language, etc.);
    •    Consultations will be conducted at locations that provide access to disadvantaged/vulnerable
         groups/individuals; and
    •    Any written or printed materials related to the project to be distributed at project sites should
         be accessible to the disadvantaged/vulnerable groups/individuals of the project; the materials
         will also be prepared in culturally appropriate and easy to understand (non-technical)
         language.

          4.5. Timing of Stakeholder Engagement

Timely organization and execution of stakeholder engagement activities that will be conducted during
implementation will be critical in supporting the Project’s risk and impact management process. This is
especially the case during the early identification and management of potential adverse and positive
impacts and risks which will allow for a cost-effective project design.
Stakeholder engagement is an on-going process that spans throughout the life of the project starting
from planning and design, construction, operation until the end of decommissioning.
Project specific SEPs prepared by the municipalities will include a stakeholder engagement program
that covers the entire life span of the project and presents the timing, frequency of engagement activities,
communication tools/method to be used, target stakeholders and responsible parties for each project
phase (preparation, implementation/construction, operation).

          4.6. Stakeholder Engagement Activities

The initial concept for the proposed Project was presented during several multi-stakeholder meetings,
including the Türkiye Presidency of Strategy and Budget (Table 5). Further consultation meetings were
conducted as part of project scoping and subsequent identification and preparation including separate
meetings with the Municipalities and related administrations as well as other government stakeholders
and development partners. This was an important stage to allow stakeholders to understand better the
scope, impact and risks of the Project, and potential opportunities; to make available Project-related
information as early as possible and to facilitate further activities of Türkiye Green and Future Cities
(GFC) Project.
The objectives of the preparation mission were to conduct a series of discussions with sector authorities
and other key stakeholders, including respective implementation units, local governments and utilities
to: (i) determine key elements of the project design, (ii) develop an initial results framework; (iii) assess
safeguards and fiduciary capacity of the assigned implementation unit; (iv) discuss project readiness
requirements related to Environmental and Social Standards; (v) initiate assessments on utility
performance, gender and citizen engagement, climate change and international water ways.
Positive feedback was received from all stakeholders during the meetings. The responsibilities of each
stakeholder in the project preparation stage and further involvement were discussed and agreed.




                                                                                                18 | P a g e




                                                                                                         Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



-          Table 5. Stakeholder Engagement Activities during Project scoping and early preparation
              Stakeholder                          Date                Main Topics Discussed

                                              14 May 2025      -   The general approach of ILBANK's
                                                                   internationally financed projects was
    Türkiye Presidency of Strategy and       10 October 2025       introduced to the Office and the
                 Budget                                            process that will need to be followed
                                                                   was discussed.
                                                               -   Alignment of the project with national
                                                                   strategy
                                            18 December 2024
                                                               -   Project preparation timeline and
                                              13 May 2025          required documentation under
                                                                   ILBANK’s Environmental and Social
    Konya Metropolitan Municipality,         19 August 2025        Management System (ESMS)
      Konya Water and Sewerage                                 -   Tentative design of the project
           Administration                    8 October 2025        components to meet the expectations;
                                                               -   Arrangement for the project
                                            11 December 2025       preparation;
                                                               -   Discussions about the localities/sites
                                                                   included in the project

                                            17 December 2024   -   Project preparation timeline and
                                                                   required documentation under
                                              12 May 2025          ILBANK’s Environmental and Social
    Antalya Metropolitan Municipality,                             Management System (ESMS)
       Konya Water and Sewerage              20 August 2025    -   Tentative design of the project
       Administration and ALDAŞ                                    components to meet the expectations;
                                             9 October 2025    -   Arrangement for the project
                                                                   preparation;
                                            10 December 2025   -   Discussions about the localities/sites
                                                                   included in the project;




                                                               -




     Ministry of Treasury and Finance       16 December 2025   -   Summary of findings form appraisal
                                                                   mission
                                                               -   Next steps for negotiations




                                                                                                 19 | P a g e




                                                                                                            Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project




          4.7. Consultation of the SEP

As part of the preparation of the Project-level SEP for the GFC project, İLBANK conducted provincial-
level online early stakeholder consultations in Antalya and Konya to share information on the Project
and to collect stakeholders’ initial feedback.

The Antalya consultation meeting was held online on 22 January 2026. İLBANK informed Antalya
Metropolitan Municipality, ASAT and ALDAŞ via email regarding the meeting and requested their
support in inviting stakeholders. Based on İLBANK’s notification, Antalya Metropolitan
Municipality/ASAT/ALDAŞ invited the following institutions and organizations through official letters
(See Annex-3):

    •    Provincial Directorate of Agriculture and Forestry

    •    Provincial Directorate of Environment, Urbanization and Climate Change

    •    DSİ 13th Regional Directorate (State Hydraulic Works)

    •    Antalya Regional Council Directorate for the Conservation of Cultural Heritage

    •    Union of Chambers of Turkish Engineers and Architects (TMMOB), Chamber of Agricultural
         Engineers, Antalya Branch

Representatives of the Antalya Metropolitan Municipality, ASAT and ALDAŞ attended the meeting.
Among the invited stakeholders, only the Antalya Provincial Directorate of Environment, Urbanization
and Climate Change participated; no participation was recorded from the other invited
institutions/organizations. (Please see- Annex-4)

During the meeting, the GFC Project was introduced, including its scope, objectives, and the sectors
planned to be supported in Antalya. İLBANK provided information on its Environmental and Social
Management System (ESMS) and briefly described the subproject process, such as screening and risk
classification, preparation of E&S documents, integration of E&S requirements into bidding documents,
and monitoring and reporting during implementation. The meeting also covered the relevant World Bank
Environmental and Social Standards (ESS), the stakeholder engagement approach, and the available
grievance mechanism and communication channels.

At the end of the meeting, a short Q&A session was held. There were not any concerns on the GFC
Project. Stakeholders have declared that they do not have any question at this stage of the project.

A question was raised from ALDAŞ regarding the template and content of the project-specific SEPs.
İLBANK Social Expert explained that ESMS templates are expected to be used, and that the final
approach will be clarified once the GFC Project-level SEP is finalized.

An online provincial-level early stakeholder consultation meeting was planned for Konya on 22 January
2026 (10:00) as part of the preparation of the Project-SEP for the GFC project. Prior to the meeting,
İLBANK shared an invitation email with Konya Metropolitan Municipality and KOSKİ, including the


                                                                                          20 | P a g e




                                                                                                  Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



online meeting details and a suggested list of institutions/organizations to be invited (e.g., the Provincial
Directorate of Agriculture and Forestry, the Provincial Directorate of Environment, Urbanization and
Climate Change, DSİ 4th Regional Directorate, the Konya Regional Commission for the Conservation
of Natural Assets, Beyşehir Chamber of Agriculture, Karapınar Chamber of Agriculture, and TMMOB
Chamber of Agricultural Engineers – Konya Branch). The meeting was attended only by representatives
of Konya Metropolitan Municipality and KOSKİ, together with ILBANK. ILBANK clarified that the
purpose of the early consultation was to provide framework-level information on the GFC Project and
to introduce the World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) and ILBANK’s Environmental
and Social Management System (ESMS), rather than to engage in detailed subproject-level discussions
(Please see- Annex-5).

        After the approval of the WB, the first draft of this SEP and the other required E&S documents
(ESCP & ESMS Summary) will be disclosed at least 10 days before the public consultation meeting.
Following documents disclosure, ILBANK will organize a consultation meeting with the participation
of the relevant ministries, general directorates, and the Municipalities/Administrations that will be
involved in the implementation of the Project.
The objective of the consultation is to inform participants about the following: (i) The scope of the
Project, (ii) potential environmental, social, and occupational health and safety (OHS) risks/impacts of
the Project and how these risks/impacts will be monitored and mitigated, (iii) E&S documents (ESMS
Summary and SEP) that have been prepared for the project, (iv) E&S documents that will be prepared
for each of the subprojects and their scope, (v) roles and responsibilities of different parties involved in
project implementation. Participants will also be informed about ILBANK’s Environmental and Social
Management System (ESMS) and the fact that the Project will be implemented under this system.
In addition to this Project-level SEP, each sub-project will be required to prepare a sub-project specific
SEP that is fully aligned with this Project-level SEP, ILBANK’s Environmental and Social Management
System (ESMS), and the World Bank’s ESS10 requirements. Sub-project specific SEPs and other E&S
assessment documents will be disclosed after the approval of İLBANK. Depending on the E&S risk
category of the sub-project, these documents will be made publicly available on both ILBANK’s and
the sub-borrowers’ websites for the minimum disclosure periods (30 calendar days for High risk, 20 for
Substantial risk, and 10 for Moderate risk projects). Following the disclosure period, sub-borrowers will
organize a public consultation meeting to present key information about the sub-project including its
purpose, scale and duration of activities, potential environmental and social risks and impacts (including
those relevant to vulnerable groups), proposed mitigation measures, planned stakeholder engagement
activities, and the grievance mechanism.
All sub-project specific E&S documents will be finalized after public consultation and revised, as
necessary, based on stakeholder feedback. The updated documents will then be re-disclosed using the
same methods described above, and will remain publicly available throughout the implementation of
the sub-project.

5. Institutional Arrangements for Stakeholder Engagement

The ESMU in İLBANK will be responsible for the overall implementation of the GFC. İLBANK has
prepared this Project Level SEP which guides İLBANK’s engagement with stakeholders on the broader


                                                                                                21 | P a g e




                                                                                                         Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



objectives of the project, as well as providing a framework for municipalities to prepare sub-project
specific SEPs.
The management, coordination and implementation of the sub-project specific SEPs and its integral
tasks will be the responsibility of dedicated team members within the relevant municipality/utility.
For the implementation of the sub-project specific SEPs, the “sub-borrower” municipalities/utilities will
be responsible for:
       •    Preparing, disclosing, consulting on, and updating the content of the draft sub-project specific
            SEP (in line with this project level SEP) and sharing it with İLBANK for final approval;
       •    After receiving İLBANK’s clearance on the draft sub-project specific SEP, disclosing and
            implementation of final sub-project specific SEP;
       •    Assigning dedicated staff for the implementation and monitoring of engagement activities;
       •    Preparing relevant engagement tools and materials for the project specific SEP and ensuring
            their timely application and/or dissemination;
       •    Approving and facilitating all stakeholder engagement events and disclosure of materials to
            support stakeholder engagement events;
       •    Keeping records of all engagement activities, monitoring and reporting to İLBANK on a
            regular basis (through providing inputs on engagement activities in the semi-annual progress
            reports);
       •    Ensuring that all feedback received from tasks carried out are incorporated in relevant
            documents and reflected in the decision-making process; and
       •    Maintaining the stakeholder database.

PIUs in the municipalities will be responsible for the implementation of the SEPs that will be prepared
specifically for sub-projects and for communication with the communities throughout the life of the
project.
The sub-project specific SEPs will be prepared by municipalities/utilities for the components in line
with the principles provided in this Project Level SEP. All contractors responsible for certain sub-project
activities will also be expected to apply the relevant provisions of the sub-project specific SEPs. The
Grievance Mechanism (GM) requirements will be regulated in tender documentation and contracts
signed with contractors.
The ESMU will review the SEPs specific to sub-projects and share it with the WB for clearance; and
after the SEP is mutually agreed with the WB, the ESMU will review and give clearance to the sub-
project specific SEPs for disclosure. Stakeholder engagement activities at sub-project level will be
managed by the PIU, while the stakeholder engagement activities at sub-project level will be carried out
in collaboration with contractors and supervision consultants. All contractors responsible for specific
project activities are also required to apply the relevant provisions of the SEP. GM requirements will be
set out in the tender documentation and contracts signed with the Contractors.
Under the ESMU of the İLBANK Financial Institutions and Investor Relations Department, a GM Team
has been established and is composed of the Social Expert of the ESMU and relevant Manager. The GM
Team is responsible for the implementation of İLBANK GM Policy1.
Table 6. Responsible Parties for SEP Implementation
        Responsible Party                                              Responsibilities

1
    https://www.İLBANK.gov.tr/storage/uploads/pagefiles/İLBANK_gm_policy_1646748212.pdf



                                                                                                 22 | P a g e




                                                                                                         Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



                              • Incorporating all stakeholder engagement activities which will be undertaken by
                                İLBANK into the environmental and social management systems
                              • Developing an internal system to communicate the progress and results of
                                stakeholder engagement to senior management and employees
      İLBANK ESMU             • Accelerating and monitoring the formation of PIUs to ensure proper
                                implementation of the processes related to the grievance mechanism and
                                stakeholder engagement issues.
                              • Coordinating the parties for proper implementation of the processes regarding the
                                grievance mechanism and stakeholder engagement issues
                              • Planning and implementation of the Project Level SEP
                              • Ensuring that stakeholder engagement is understood by PIU members and other
                                stakeholders
                              • Organizing / managing Stakeholder Engagement/Consultation Meetings and
                                related events on public information sharing at project level
                              • Supporting other ESMU staff who may interact with stakeholders
   Social Expert (ESMU)
                              • Coordinating interface and reporting to/from the World Bank on the
                                implementation of the SEP/SEPs
                              • Updating the Project Level SEP periodically and in case of major Project changes
                              • Reviewing the sub-project specific SEPs
                                Monitoring and supporting the PIUs regarding communication with stakeholders
                                and stakeholder engagement is at the maximum level
                              • Monitoring the progress of the project
                              • Ensuring the successful delivery of all defined documents
      Environmental           • Consolidating reports on overall Project Level SEP activities and project progress
     Specialist (ESMU)        • Implementing social and environmental monitoring
                              • Monitoring and reporting about the social and environmental issues specified in
                                the relevant documents that are implemented throughout the Project
                              • Acting as the focal point for the GM in the ESMU
                              • Keeping records and follow-up of the complaints related to the project
                              • Managing and coordinating the solution process of project-related complaints
                              • Inspecting grievance records to reveal relevant non-compliance issues or recurring
                                issues with stakeholder engagement and other Project activities
                              • Coordinating and monitoring GM contacts at the contractor level
     GM Team, Social
     Expert (ESMU)            • Collecting project-related grievances from all different GM levels
                              • Informing the ESMU and management about the solution process
                              • Preparing compiled GM reports related to the project
                              • Monitoring the grievance records of contractors and the resolution process of the
                                grievances and reporting them to the ESMU in monthly progress reports
                              • Maintaining regular contact with the ESMU in order to respond to grievances/find
                                solutions




                                                                                                     23 | P a g e




                                                                                                             Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



                              • Providing consultancy in tenders to be held within the scope of the Project.
        Procurement           • Ensuring that the GM and the other environmental and social instruments are
         Specialist             incorporated into the tender documents
                              • Preparing English and Turkish copies of the tender documents

     Monitoring and           • Coordinating monitoring and evaluation studies
   Evaluation Specialist      • Preparing monitoring reports to be submitted to WB in a timely manner
    Technical Specialist      • Providing technical support to the project

      Governmental            • Providing inputs and feedback during the preparation and implementation phases
   Authorities (both local      of both project level SEP and sub-project specific SEPs
    and national level)       • Participating in relevant stakeholder engagement/consultation meetings

                              • Acting as the focal point for the GM in the PIU
                              • Keeping records and following up on complaints related to the project
                              • Managing and coordinating the solution process of project-related complaints
                              • Inspecting grievance records for relevant non-compliance issues or recurring
                                issues with stakeholder engagement and other Project activities
                              • Coordinating and monitoring GM contacts at the contractor level
   GM Focal Point (PIU)
                              • Collecting project-related grievances from all different GM levels
                              • Informing the PIU and management about the solution process
                              • Preparing compiled GM reports related to the project
                              • Monitoring the grievance records of contractors and the resolution process of the
                                grievances and reporting them to the PIU in monthly progress reports
                              • Maintaining contact with the PIU in order to respond to grievances/find solutions
                              • Ensuring that stakeholder engagement is understood by PIU members and other
                                stakeholders
                              • Carrying out the stakeholder engagement activities with identified stakeholders
                              • Organizing/managing Stakeholder Engagement/Consultation Meetings and related
                                events on public information sharing
                              • Supporting other PIU staff who may interact with stakeholders
                              • Supporting the Supervision Consultants and the sub-contractors on the
                                implementation of E&S Documents (ESMPs, SEPs and RPs)
                              • Preparing sub-project specific SEPs in consultation and cooperation with the
    Environmental and           relevant building management
   Social Specialist of the
            PIUs              • Supervising the implementation of the Project’s environmental and social
                                instruments
                              • Implementing the sub project specific SEPs
                              • Reviewing monitoring reports
                              • Preparing semi-annual reports on the implementation of the environmental and
                                social instruments
                              • Alerting İLBANK management about accidents and incidents
                              • Monitoring and reporting about the social and environmental issues specified in
                                the relevant project specific E&S documents to be implemented throughout the
                                Project.




                                                                                                     24 | P a g e




                                                                                                               Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



                              • Ensuring that the project adheres to the methodology and other requirements
                                which are mentioned in E&S Documents (ESMPs, SEPs and RPs) during
                                implementation of sub-projects
        Supervision
                              • Monitoring the contractors’ recording and resolution of grievances, and reporting
        Consultant
                                these to PIU in their monthly progress reports
                              • Maintaining contact with the PIU GM Focal Point for the follow up of the
                                grievances
                              • Monitoring the contractors’ recording and resolution of grievances, and reporting
                                these to the PIUs in their monthly progress reports
       Community
                              • Maintaining contact with the PIU GM Focal Point for the follow up of the
   Engagement Officers
                                grievances
      (Contractor)
                              • Organizing and carrying out the Stakeholder Engagement/Consultation Meetings
                                and related events regarding public information sharing



6. Grievance Mechanism

The main objective of a Grievance Mechanism (GM) is to assist in resolving complaints and grievances
in a timely, effective, and efficient manner that satisfies all parties involved.

          6.1. Project Specific Grievance Mechanism (for İLBANK and the
                Municipalities)

İLBANK has established a transparent and comprehensive GM in September 2021 in order to receive,
evaluate and address grievances pertaining to every international project it finances, and relevant
mechanism will be in place during the course of the Project. With the establishment of Environmental
and Social Management System (ESMS), İLBANK revised and integrated its Grievance Policy into a
Grievance Mechanism (GM) consistent with the World Bank’s ESS10. The GM Policy of İLBANK is
disclosed                                                                                         at
https://www.İLBANK.gov.tr/storage/uploads/pagefiles/İLBANK_gm_policy_1646748212.pdf.

GMs will also be established by those municipalities that do not already have GMs in place. All the
local GMs will receive, resolve and follow up on issues raised by stakeholder in relation to subproject
issues (such as suggestions, complaints, compliments, inquires for information or whistle-blower
complaints). The social expert of the Municipality/Utility and the construction contractor will be
accessible to all stakeholders and will be responsible to ensure that all requests are handled in a timely
and effective manner. The local GMs will be established in line with the GM described in the İLBANK
GM Policy.

The operational flow of GM for the stakeholders will be as follows:

    1. Dissemination of GM. Communication and information tools will be prepared to disseminate
       information about the GM. The project stakeholders will be informed regarding the available




                                                                                                    25 | P a g e




                                                                                                              Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



         GM, its intake channels and operational procedures. The communication and informative tools
         to be developed are listed, but not limited to the followings:
              a. Web page (İLBANK, participating municipalities/utilities)
              b. E-mail address (İLBANK, participating municipalities/utilities)
              c. Consultation meetings
              d. Telephone (İLBANK, participating municipalities/utilities)
    2.   Submission of grievances and requests to İLBANK. İLBANK includes several uptake
         channels for its GM.:
              a. İLBANK website,
              b. Internal Memorandum (memo),
              c. E-mail,
              d. Brochures and leaflets; and
              e. Face to face meetings.
    3.   Submission of grievances and requests at the subproject level. PIUs at the municipal/utility
         level will establish GMs, with multiple channels for submitting grievance and requests, as listed
         below:
              a. Telephone (Call Center and units);
              b. Personal visit to Municipalities/Utilities or head office/branches of the construction
                  contractor;
              c. The suggestion/complaint boxes (installed at İLBANK, Municipalities/Utilities or
                  construction sites);
              d. Through concerned public administrations (district governorship, municipality,
                  mukhtars);
              e. E-mail;
              f. Meetings;
              g. Through staff and local communication desk of Municipalities/Utilities or social expert
                  of construction contractor;
              h. By written petition to Municipalities/Utilities or construction contractor; and
              i. During site visits
    4.   All the grievances received through the above channels will be collected at the PIU or
         Construction Contractor level.
    5.   The grievances received will be recorded (Annex – 2) into the database by the social experts of
         the PIUs or the contractors.
    6.   Social experts who filed the grievance to confirm the receipt of the grievance by telephone
         and/or email within 2 days.
    7.   Social experts prepare the draft response and submits it to the approval of the relevant Project
         Management (ESMU, PIU or Contractor).
    8.   Following the response, the Grievance Form will be updated according to the outcome of the
         process and the complainant will receive the result within 10 working days. If the complaint is
         valid identifying and taking the required action within 15 working days. With the acceptance
         of the resolution by the applicant within 30 days, the case is closed. In case the applicant is not
         satisfied with the response and does not sign the Complaint Form (Annex – 1), the social expert
         will organize a meeting with the PIU management, with the participation of the complainant,


                                                                                               26 | P a g e




                                                                                                        Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



         associated members of the PIU and the relevant construction contractor. The complainant will
         his/her concern with the management. The meeting will try to propose another solution to the
         complainant for the resolution that both parties can agree on.
     9. If the complainant is still not satisfied with the outcome of the process, he/she may pursue their
         complaint through legal channels in the country.
     10. A monitoring and evaluation system has been established. The monitoring is recorded in the
         monitoring and evaluation system.

The most important point in the grievance mechanism is to ensure that all requests are effectively
received and recorded in a timely way, responded to and resolved within a predetermined timeline and
on the basis of the content of the complaint. This has to be done by the CLOs for the
municipality/construction contractor, and proposed corrective/regulatory action has to be acceptable to
both parties, or the complainant can pursue legal recourse. Additionally, the mechanism has to allow for
anonymous complaints to be addressed and handled, including those related to sexual exploitation and
abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH).

           6.2. Workers’ Grievance Mechanism

The workers (direct, contracted, including PIU staff) will be informed about the existence of grievance
mechanisms, through notice boards, the presence of "suggestion/complaint boxes" and other means as
needed. In addition, the workers’ grievance mechanism will be described during the personnel induction
trainings to be provided to all project workers. The workers’ GM will allow submission of anonymous
grievances and requests and these anonymous applications will also be addressed and handled.

The GM Team is established with expert/technical expert and technical group manager under the ESMU
of İLBANK Department of Financial Institutions and Investor Relations includes expert/technical expert
and technical group manager.

The Ethics committee (EC) is responsible for investigating all sensitive complaints2 referred by the GM
team or by any member of İLBANK ESMUstaff includes a senior manager, a manager and a staff
representative under the İLBANK Financial Institutions and Investor Relations Department.

The workers grievance mechanism will have same operational flow as defined in Section6.1., Project
Specific Grievance Mechanism.

İLBANK The worker complaints and requests will be classified based on their severity, frequency and
more importantly sensitivity. Categories of complaints, descriptions and the responsible parties are
presented below:




2 Sensitive complaints could include the following (not an exhaustive list): 1) Sexual exploitation and/or any type of abuse by

a staff member; 2) Fraud and/or corruption by a staff member, such as involvement in bribery or misusing funds; 3) Any action
which constitutes a breach of İLBANK code of conduct including staff behavior.


                                                                                                                27 | P a g e




                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project




Table 6. Categories of Worker Complaints
                                                   Worker Complaints

       Category               Description                                Responsible Party

       Level 1                When an answer can be provided            •   GM Team
                              immediately and/or GM Team and            •   Municipal/Contractor
                              Municipal/Contractor Community            •   Community Engagement
                              Engagement Officers are already               Officers
                              working on a resolution                   •   Workers’ representative (if
                                                                            any)
       Level 2                Repeated, extensive and high-profile      •   GM Team
                              grievances that may jeopardize the        •   Municipal/Contractor
                              Project or pose reputational risks            Community Engagement
                                                                            Officers
                                                                        •   Ethics Committee
                                                                        •   External Experts (when
                                                                            necessary)
                                                                        •   Workers’ representative (if
                                                                            any)


    6.3. Management of Sensitive Grievances (Sexual Exploitation and
        Abuse/Sexual Harassment issues)
Although the risk from project activities is low, the grievance mechanism shall include handling Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) complaints. The GM that will be in place for the
project workers will also be used for addressing SEA/SH related issues and will have in place
mechanisms for confidential reporting, with safe and ethical documenting of SEA/SH issues.

Under Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), İLBANK implements specific
procedures for managing sensitive and confidential grievances, particularly those related to Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse (SEA), Sexual Harassment (SH), Gender-Based Violence (GBV), and potential
cases of child abuse. These procedures3 are fully aligned with the World Bank’s Environmental and
Social Framework (ESF) and the Good Practice Note on SEA/SH.

-   When a grievance is submitted to İLBANK’s Grievance Mechanism (GM) that directly refers to or
    implies sexual harassment, the social expert receiving the grievance shall forward it to the Manager
    of the Environmental and Social Management Unit (ESMU).

The Manager of the ESMU will refer the grievance to the Ethics Committee, for a determination on
whether the grievance is SEA/SH-related. If confirmed as SEA/SH-related, the İLBANK Ethics


3
 If there are any changes regarding the procedure and/or implementation, the revised procedure will be carried
out after the approval of the WB.


                                                                                                 28 | P a g e




                                                                                                          Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



Committee initiates a sensitive complaint management process based on the principles of
confidentiality, impartiality, survivor protection, and due diligence. The complainant retains full rights
to confidentiality under the Turkish Constitution and the right to seek legal recourse at any time in
accordance with national law.

All grievances are handled in a confidential and secure manner, accessible only to authorized personnel,
and are recorded in anonymized form. The Ethics Committee may seek internal or external expertise
(e.g., gender, legal, or IT specialists) as needed. If the grievance involves a potential criminal offence,
the Ethics Committee immediately refers the case to the relevant public authorities or service providers
and monitors the process confidentially. The Committee convenes within 48 hours of receiving a
sensitive complaint, completes an initial review within five business days, and finalizes the full
investigation within one month at the latest.

İLBANK adopts a survivor-centered approach, ensuring that the safety and well-being of survivors
remain at the forefront throughout the grievance management process. This approach is an integral
component of İLBANK’s institutional Grievance Mechanism (GM) and is fully aligned with the World
Bank’s Environmental and Social Standard 10 (ESS10).

    6.4. World Bank Grievance Redress System
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB)
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the
WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly
reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may
submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm
occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints
may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank’s attention,
and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit
complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit
http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service        .
Project affected communities or individuals can also raise their grievances to the World Bank
Independent Inspection Panel (IIP). This panel determines whether the person or communities that made
the complaint were harmed because of the breach of one or more of the WB's performance criteria. The
panel can directly convey its concerns about the received complaints to the WB. At this stage, WB would
have an opportunity to respond to the complaints. For information on how to submit complaints to the
World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org.


.




                                                                                              29 | P a g e




                                                                                                       Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



7. Monitoring and Reporting

          7.1. Summary of How SEP Implementation will be Monitored and
                Reported

Monitoring and evaluation of the stakeholder engagement process is of utmost importance to ensure
timely and effective decision making for Project implementation.

Each project specific SEP will include a timeline for engagement activities as well as defining
responsible parties for the implementation and monitoring of engagement activities. Monitoring of
engagement activities can be realized through identifying key performance indicators that reflect the
objectives of the SEP, and the specific tasks and actions. A series of sample key performance indicators
by Project Phase are presented in Table 7. .

Table 7. Sample Key Performance Indicators by Project Phase
  Project Phase                           Indicator                               Verification Method
 Design      and     Preparation of subproject specific SEPs               # of subproject specific SEPs
 Planning                                                                  prepared
                     Public consultation meetings carried out to provide   # of meetings conducted
                     Project information and introduce project documents   # and type of participants attended
                     such as ESIA/ESMPs and/or RPs
                     Designated staff appointed to carry out subproject    Statement of staff appointed
                     specific SEP
                     Establishment of Project GM                           Official correspondence
 Construction        Awareness raising activities carried out throughout   # of meetings held
                     the life of the Project                               # of people interacted
                     # of grievances received due to construction          Decrease in the # of grievances
                                                                           received due to construction
 Operation           # of grievances received                              Decrease in the # of grievances
                                                                           received due to operation

The municipalities will be responsible for reporting to İLBANK semi-annually on project progress. Sub-
project specific progress reports will also include a section on stakeholder engagement activities
conducted and disaggregated data about the grievances during the specified period. Stakeholder
engagement activities can be presented in a tabular format listing the tasks undertaken, the time of action,
responsible party, target group and the purpose of the action will be presented. The municipalities will
inform İLBANK on any changes made to the SEP (if any).




                                                                                                  30 | P a g e




                                                                                                           Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities                                                             SEP



8. ANNEXES

          Annex -1 Complaint Form

                                             Public and Municipal Renewable Energy Project

                                                   COMPLAINT REGISTER FORM

                       Person Filling the Form:                                     Date:

                          Interview Agenda:                                   Reference No:

                           1. INFORMATION ABOUT THE COMPLAINANT

 Name Surname (Anonymous applications are also accepted. In
   case the complaint is submitted anonymously, the feedback
      regarding the measures taken/to be taken may not be             How to receive the complaint
 communicated to the complainant. The result of the complaint
          will be made public on the İLBANK website) :

                         Turkish ID Number:                                         Phone

                                    Phone:                                      Face to face

                                Address:                                    Web-site/ E-Mail

                                E-Mail:                                      Other (Explain)

                                             Stakeholder Type

       Public            Project Affected           Private             Trade                 NGO
                             People
     Institution                                  Enterprise          Association

      Interest               Industry              Workers’             Media               University
                            Associations
      Groups                                        Union

                        2. DETAILED INFORMATION ON THE COMPLAINT

    Description of the Complaint:


 Resolution method requested by the
            complainant

      Registered Person Name                        Complainant Name Surname/Signature
        Surname/Signature




                                                                                                     Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities                                             SEP




                Annex -2 Grievance Log Form



         How
                                                                                                                                                                                     Supportin
         Grievan
                                                                                                                     Grievance                                                       g
         ce is                                                         Complainant Information                                                       Action Taken
                                                                Land                                                 Category                                                        Document
         Receive                                         Name                                                                               Grieva
                                                                Parcel                                       Project (expropriatio                                                   s for
  Grieva d                                 Date   Locati of                                                                                 nce
                 Level of                                       #                                            Compo n/land                                                            Grievance
  nce    (Grieva                           of     on of  Perso                                                                       Grieva Status
                 Grievance                                      (If                                          nent    acquisition                                        Due          Closeout
N Regist nce                               Grieva Grieva n                                                                           nce    (open,
                 (Municipality                                  grieva                                       Related related,                                           Date of Date (bank
o er     Form,                             nce    nce    Receiv                                                                      Summ closed
                 /Utility Level,                                nce is                           Villa       to      environment                                  Actio the     of   receipt for
  Numb Commu                               Receiv Receiv ing                                                                         ary    or
                 Regional)                                      relate Name/Sur ID      Teleph
                                                                                                 ge-   Gen   Grievan al issues,                      Responsible
                                                                                                                                                                  n     Addres Acti compens
  er     nity                              ed     ed     Grieva                  Num    one/                                                pendin   Person/Depa
                                                                d to   name                      Distr der   ce      damages to                                   Plan sing     on   ation,
         Meeting                                         nce                     ber    email                                               g)       rtment
                                                                land)                            ict                 structures                                   ned   the     Tak grievance
         ,
                                                                                                                     etc.)                                              Grievan en   closure
         Teleph
                                                                                                                                                                        ce           protocol)
         one)


1




                                                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities                                          SEP



                Annex -3 Official Invitation Letter of Antalya Metropolitan Municipality




                                                                                           Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities Project



                Annex -4 Attendance Screenshot of Antalya Meeting (22 Jan 2026)




                                                                                  34 | P a g e




                                                                                          Official Use Only
İLBANK – Türkiye Green and Future Cities                                        SEP



                Annex -5 Attendance Screenshot of Konya Meeting (22 Jan 2026)




                                                                                      Official Use Only
