Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Community Action For Resilient Education (P509605)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 11/26/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05322




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 05, 2026                                                                          Page 1 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Community Action For Resilient Education (P509605)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P509605                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         CARE                       2027

                     Operation Name            Community Action for Resilient Education

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Mali                      Mali                                       WESTERN AND CENTRAL        Education
                                                                                          AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                   Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Economy       Ministry of education                      30-Jun-2026
                     and Finance

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     13-Nov-2025               4,100,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective is: (i) strengthen community capacity to manage school construction process; and
                     (ii) improve the climate resilience and sustainability of school infrastructure.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     This Investment Project Financing (IPF) operation will be financed by a small recipient-executed trust fund (RETF) in the
                     amount of US$4.1 million. It would complement the Mali Improving Education Quality and Results for All Project
                     (MIQRA, P164032), and its upcoming second phase. In addition, the project will seek complementarities with other
                     interventions, such as the Mali Community Resilience and Inclusive Services Project – CRISP (P505025), by piloting a
                     model of school construction in locations not covered by other projects. As such, the project proposes to establish a
                     tested model that could be implemented in any of Mali’s diverse geographic areas using other projects, notably
                     MIQRA’s second phase. The project is structured around three key components: Component 1 - Piloting community-

                    Jan 05, 2026                                                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Community Action For Resilient Education (P509605)



                     based construction models in selected regions; component 2 - Identifying sustainable school construction approaches;
                     and Component 3 - Project Management and Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge
                     Dissemination. The implementation period is three years.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The proposed project, Community Action for Resilient Education (CARE), will be implemented nationwide, in both rural
                     and urban areas of Mali, specifically in the regions of Ségou, Mopti, Koulikoro, formally known as Central Mali as well as
                     the peripheries of the capital Bamako. Mali, a Sahelian country in a state of fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV), has an
                     economy primarily based on agriculture and livestock, sectors that are highly dependent on seasonal rainfall patterns.
                     Rising temperatures, erratic rainfall, and extreme weather events present significant challenges that directly impact the
                     education sector, particularly by disrupting access to schools, deteriorating educational infrastructure, and affecting the
                     safety of students and teachers. Additionally, security issues, exacerbated by ongoing conflicts, severely limit the
                     mobility of teachers and students, making the construction and rehabilitation of school infrastructure difficult, and
                     restricting access to quality education, especially in the most vulnerable areas of the country.

                     The World Bank projects Mali's extreme poverty rate to decrease to 20.8% in 2024, due to lower inflation and economic
                     growth. However, the country faces an influx of internally displaced populations, mainly from the north, and high rates
                     of gender-based violence and early marriage. Access to primary education is lower than in neighboring countries, with
                     notable regional disparities. Accessibility challenges and overcrowded classrooms affect learning, especially for girls,
                     who are more likely to face exclusion due to social norms and insecurity. Rapid population growth will place further



Public Disclosure
                     pressure on the education system, requiring investments in sustainable school infrastructure.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of National Education will implement the project. This ministry is already managing the Bank-financed Mali
                     Improving Education Quality and Results for All (MIQRA, P164032), which now has a newly established Project
                     Implementation Unit (PIU) rather than a project facilitation team following recent restructuring. The PIU includes key
                     personnel such as a coordinator, an M&E officer, and other dedicated specialists, for example, experts in
                     decentralization, construction, and procurement. The new MIQRA PIU has therefore been tasked with implementing the
                     proposed CARE project as well. All new PIU personnel have been replaced except for the social and environmental
                     safeguard team and the GBV specialist, who remain. However, the Bank Safeguards specialists are currently preparing
                     ESF training for the new PIU staff.
                     The National Directorate of Sanitation, Pollution Control, and Nuisance Control (DNACPN) in the Ministry of
                     Environment manages environmental and social assessments. They will monitor the preparation and the
                     implementation of the project given the project's moderate rating; Mali's environmental and social framework will be
                     applied. The Bank’s team will evaluate the borrower’s capacity to meet the Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework
                     (ESF) requirements using a questionnaire about their recent experience with ESF instruments. This will be documented
                     in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS




                    Jan 05, 2026                                                                                                         Page 3 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Community Action For Resilient Education (P509605)



                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                             Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                      Moderate
                     The environmental risk rating for this project is currently considered moderate due to its scope, geographical
                     coverage, and the country’s capacity to manage environmental risks, particularly in the context of recent education
                     projects. The project aims to strengthen community involvement in the school construction process while integrating
                     measures that promote climate resilience and the long-term sustainability of school infrastructure. Specifically, sub-
                     component 1.1 will support the construction and equipping of classrooms in 50 villages. Key identified risks include air
                     pollution from dust and noise emissions, which could temporarily affect air quality and community health. Another
                     significant risk is waste management, particularly construction debris, which requires strict safety procedures and
                     appropriate disposal methods to minimize environmental and health impacts. Lastly, the risk of road accidents related
                     to supervision missions, while present, can be mitigated through enhanced safety protocols.
                                                                                                                                        Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project's social risk rating is considered moderate. Major concerns include security issues in Segou and Mopti due
                     to a rise in terrorist attacks, as well as the risk of forced and child labor during community-led construction activities
                     related to educational improvements under sub-component 2.2. These risks are especially significant for internally
                     displaced persons. Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) hazards may also occur during the harvesting of local
                     materials, highlighting the need for thorough hazard assessments, awareness training, and correct use of protective
                     gear. Additionally, the project may involve some land acquisition, economic resettlement, with some physical
                     displacement possible. If the government will request the use of project funds to finance resettlement costs, the team



Public Disclosure
                     will seek RVP approval for this expenditure at the time this is identified and before civil works are carried out. It is also
                     crucial to mitigate risks related to Gender-Based Violence (GBV), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA), and Sexual
                     Harassment (SH) that could arise due to increased population movements in the intervention areas.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                     Relevant

                      This Standard is relevant. The project mainly involves small- and medium-scale civil engineering works for the
                      construction and equipping of classrooms, with risks related to OHS, pollution, ecosystem disruption, and community
                      health and safety during the construction, operation, and maintenance (O&M) phases. The Contractors'
                      Environmental and Social Management Plans (C-ESMPs) will address these risks once the subprojects and their areas
                      of intervention are determined. An E&S screening will be carried out once subprojects are determined, and necessary
                      assessments will be developed based on the identified risks. These measures will be reflected in the Environmental
                      and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and integrated into operation manuals and procurement documents.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                          Relevant

                      The standard is relevant. The stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) will be prepared and will define project affected
                      parties (PAP) including vulnerable groups who would be more limited in their ability to take advantage of project


                    Jan 05, 2026                                                                                                          Page 4 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Community Action For Resilient Education (P509605)



                      benefits e.g. internally displaced children, parents and families. The Other Interested Parties for the project include
                      beneficiaries of the World Bank-financed MIQRA (P164032), the Mali Community Resilience and Inclusive Services
                      Project (P505025), other World Bank-financed projects in the same intervention areas as the CARE project, as well as
                      teachers, parents of children in primary school, training providers, and financial contributors from the diaspora
                      community. A SEP with a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be prepared before appraisal.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The standard will apply to 1) direct workers who will be PIU employees, consultants hired
                      for project implementation; 2) the contracted workers, and 3) and community workers. Labor risks will be addressed
                      through the government’s commitment in the ESCP to comply with the requirements of the ESS2 and the Project
                      Operations Manual (POM) which will provide clear steps to ensure compliance. The ESCP will: (1) include
                      commitment of the government to strictly follow the Bank’s guideline on the employment of consultants; (2) require
                      the government to include in the POM measures to ensure compliance with the ESS2, satisfactory to the Bank; (3)
                      include grievance mechanisms that the project workers can use if they feel their contractual rights are not respected.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The construction of classrooms and their equipment could generate localized and site-
                      specific E&S impacts. These impacts include air, water, and soil pollution, hazardous and non-hazardous waste, and
                      fuel spills resulting from civil works. Appropriate measures will be taken to contain these types of pollution. The
                      operation of the classrooms will generate moderate amounts of various types of waste, primarily household-type




Public Disclosure
                      waste, which will be managed in accordance with existing national regulations by school management. It is unlikely
                      that significant cumulative impacts will occur, as the school constructions will be in different geographical regions.
                      Guidance will be provided as part of the subproject screening process, and mitigation measures will be included in
                      the ESMP and ESMP checklists. The ESMP will include mitigation measures to minimize and manage these risks and
                      impacts, including guidance for the disposal of waste generated by these activities.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      The standard is relevant and will address construction risks like accidents, noise, disturbances, and hazardous
                      materials. Schools and communities need protective measures. Transporting construction materials may present road
                      safety issues but remains manageable. Internal displacement pose a risk of vulnerability, gender-based violence,
                      exploitation and sexual abuse.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      The standard is relevant due to the necessity of land acquisition for constructing school infrastructures. Efforts will be
                      made to minimize land acquisition and resettlement or avoid physical resettlements. Some economic resettlements
                      may be unavoidable, but this will be determined once sites are selected, and environmental and social screening is
                      conducted to assess whether ESS5 applies and if a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                     Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources



                    Jan 05, 2026                                                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Community Action For Resilient Education (P509605)



                      This standard is not relevant. The project is not expected to involve a change in primary production and/or harvesting
                      of living natural resources. Construction activities financed by the project will source raw materials from established
                      regional and local markets and national quarries. Activities will not be undertaken in sensitive natural areas or in the
                      habitats of endangered species. The potential environmental risks and impacts associated with the project are limited
                      to the site of subproject construction activities. The ESMP will provide guidance on screening and mitigation
                      measures to ensure that project activities do not alter or cause the destruction of critical or sensitive natural habitats.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                 Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not relevant. No indigenous peoples who meet the criteria described under this standard reside in
                      the territory of Mali.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                           Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is currently not relevant. It is unlikely that the project will have any impacts or impose access
                      restrictions on known cultural or built heritage sites. Buildings recognized for their architectural, aesthetic, spiritual,
                      or socio-cultural value are not expected to be affected by construction activities (e.g., religious buildings). Project
                      activities will be assessed for potential impacts, including access restrictions to known heritage buildings and sites,
                      and relevant national requirements for the protection of these sites will be applied. The ESMP will outline the Chance
                      Find Procedures, which will be included for all subprojects involving earth-moving works.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      This standard is not relevant. There is no financial intermediation intended in the design of this project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            In Part
                       The National Directorate for Sanitation and Pollution Control and its regional branches oversee environmental
                       protection, while Ministry of Labor inspectors ensure workplace compliance with labor laws. Due to limited resources,
                       the borrower's capacity to implement the project within the ESF framework must be strengthened. The project will be
                       implemented by the Ministry of National Education. This ministry is currently implementing the Bank financed Mali
                       Improving Education Quality and Results for All which has an effective project facilitation unit comprised of key staff.
                       MIQRA’s safeguard specialists, experienced in Bank policies and the ESF, will be assigned to the project during
                       preparation and implementation. A capacity assessment will identify any gaps or measures needed, which will be
                       documented in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan.




                    Jan 05, 2026                                                                                                         Page 6 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Community Action For Resilient Education (P509605)



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                        No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     1.        Preparation of an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) (before Apraisal)
                     2.        Preparation of a Stakeholders engagement Plan (SEP) (before Apraisal)


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Modibo Sidibe                         Title:        Senior Economist

                      Email:                  msidibe4@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Franco Russo                          Job Title:    Senior Operations Officer

                      Email:                  Frusso@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                      Modibo Sidibe, Franco Russo

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:             Mohamed Youba Sokona

                     ADM Social Specialist:                    Christophe Bertrand Messina, Mahamadou Ahmadou Maiga




                    Jan 05, 2026                                                                                              Page 7 of 7
