Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                           FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                                                                                                                           Report No: PADHI01170




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                               INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

                                                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                      ON A

                                                                              PROPOSED GRANT

                                                                  IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 105.5 MILLION
                                                                      (US$143 MILLION EQUIVALENT)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                  TO THE
                                                                         REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE

                                                                                    FOR AN

                                                                     URBAN WATER SECURITY PROJECT


                                                                                 MAY 22, 2025




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Water Global Practice
                                Eastern and Southern Africa Region




                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                         CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                     (Exchange Rate Effective April 30)

                    Currency Unit =
                             US$1 = SDR 0.74

                                 FISCAL YEAR
                               July 1 – June 30




  Regional Vice President: Ndiamé Diop
Regional Practice Director: Anne Wellenstein
  Acting Division Director: Luc Lecuit
        Practice Manager: Francis Ghesquiere
      Task Team Leaders: Jaime Palalane, Pierre Francois-Xavier Boulenger
                      ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AIAS      Water and Sanitation Infrastructures Administration
ARA-Sul   South Region Water Administration (Administração Regional de Águas do Sul)
AdRMM     Maputo Metropolitan Area Water Company (Águas da Região Metropolitana de Maputo)
AdRS      Southern Region Water Company (Águas da Região do Sul)
ARA       Regional Water Administration
AURA      Water Regulatory Authority (Autoridade Reguladora de Água)
CERC      Contingent Emergency Response Component
CPF       Country Partnership Framework
DNAAS     National Directorate for Water Supply and Sanitation (Direcção Nacional de Abastecimento de
          Água e Saneamento)
DNGRH     National Directorate for Water Resources Management (Direcção Nacional de Gestão de
          Recursos Hídricos)
ENASU     National Strategy for Urban Water and Sanitation (Estratégia Nacional de Água e Saneamento
          Urbano)
ESF       Environmental and Social Framework
ESMF      Environmental and Social Management Framework
FIPAG     Water Supply Asset Holding and Investment Fund (Fundo de Investimento e Património do
          Abastecimento de Água)
FM        Financial Management
GMMA      Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area
GoM       Government of Mozambique
GRID      Green, Resilient and Inclusive Development
IDA       International Development Association
IFR       Interim Financial Report
IPF       Investment Project Financing
IWRM      Integrated Water Resources Management
MOPHRH    Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water Resources
NRW       Non-Revenue Water
PASA      Action Plan for the Sustainable Development Goals
PBC       Performance-Based Condition
PDO       Project Development Objectives
PER       Public Expenditure Review
PIM       Project Implementation Manual
PIU       Project Implementation Unit
PTU       Project Technical Units
PWP       Private Water Provider
ROC       Regional Operating Companies
UoF       Utilities of the Future
WASH      Water Sanitation Hygiene
WASIS     Water Services and Institutional Support
The World Bank
Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



                                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS

 DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i
 I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 1
       A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................1
       B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................................2
 II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 5
       A. Project Development Objective .......................................................................................................5
       B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .............................................................................................5
       C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................6
       D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................6
       E. Role of Partners ..............................................................................................................................10
       F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design....................................................................10
 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 11
       A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................11
       B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ..................................................12
       C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................12
 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 12
       A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ..................................................................................12
       Technical Analysis ..............................................................................................................................12
       B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................14
       C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ...................................................................16
       D. Gender and Citizen Engagement ...................................................................................................17
 V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 19
 ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 21
 ANNEX 2: PROJECT COSTAB ................................................................................................ 30
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Mozambique               Urban Water Security Project
                                                     Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                     Classification
                         Investment Project
P509890                                              Substantial
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                     [✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                   [✓] Fragile State(s)
[✓] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                        [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                              [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                    [✓] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                          [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                 [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
17-Jun-2025                            31-Dec-2030
Bank/IFC Collaboration                 Joint Level
Yes                                    Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination


Proposed Development Objective(s)
To increase access to water supply services and to improve the efficiency of urban water supply services.


Components
 Component Name                                                                                             Cost (US$)


                                                                                                                         i
     The World Bank
     Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 C1: Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services                       72,100,000.00
 C2: Improvement of performance and efficiency of services                                           49,350,000.00
 C3: Water sector development support                                                                14,260,000.00
 C4: Project management support                                                                       7,290,000.00
 C5: Contingent Emergency Response                                                                            0.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower:                     Republic of Mozambique

 Contact                       Title                        Telephone No.       Email
 Implementing Agency:          Ministry of Public Works, Housing, and Water Resources

 Contact                       Title                         Telephone No.       Email
 Raul Mutevuie Júnior          National Director             258843120130        bombatejunior@gmail.com



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                     143.00

  Total Financing                                                                                          143.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                             143.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                              0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                             143.00

        of which IDA Recommitted                                                                           143.00

                                                                                                                    ii
     The World Bank
     Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


        IDA Grant                                                                                             143.00


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

                                                                                           Guarantee
                           Credit Amount     Grant Amount         SML Amount                             Total Amount
                                                                                             Amount

National
Performance-Based                   0.00            143.00                 0.00                 0.00           143.00
Allocations (PBA)

Total                               0.00            143.00                 0.00                 0.00           143.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year                2025          2026          2027             2028             2029          2030          2031

Annual              0.00          10.00         30.00           30.00             30.00         30.00        13.00
Cumulative          0.00          10.00         40.00           70.00          100.00           130.00       143.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                         Contributing Practice Areas
Water

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                              Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                ⚫ Moderate

                                                                                                                      iii
     The World Bank
     Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


2. Macroeconomic                                                            ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Low
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Substantial
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Substantial
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Low
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Moderate


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities

                                                                                                              iv
       The World Bank
       Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                              Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                       Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The Recipient shall no later than thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, prepare
and adopt a Project Implementation Manual, in form and substance acceptable to the Association (“Project
Implementation Manual” or “PIM”). Except as the Association shall otherwise agree, the Recipient shall not amend or
waive any provision of the PIM. In case of any conflict between the terms of the PIM and those of this Agreement, the
terms of this Agreement shall prevail.
The Recipient shall: (a) Appoint by not later than ninety (90) days after the Effective Date and thereafter maintain, at all
times during the implementation of the Project, a verification agent under terms of reference acceptable to the
Association (“Independent Verification Agent or IVA”), to verify the data and other evidence supporting the
achievement of PBCs as set forth in the table in Schedule 3 to this Agreement, and recommend payments to be made,
as applicable; and (b) Ensure that the IVA carry out verification and process(es) in accordance with the Verification
Protocol; and submit to the Association the corresponding verification reports in a timely manner and in form and
substance satisfactory to the Association.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                              Citation                     Description                     Financing Source
                                                               The Additional Condition of
                                                               Effectiveness consist of the
                                                               following, namely, that the
                                                               respective Subsidiary
                                                               Agreements between the
                                                               Recipient and FIPAG, ARA-
                                                               Sul and AURA have been
Effectiveness                     TBD                                                          IBRD/IDA
                                                               executed and delivered and
                                                               all conditions precedent to
                                                               its effectiveness or to the
                                                               right of the Recipient to
                                                               make withdrawals under it
                                                               (other than the
                                                               effectiveness of this


                                                                                                                         v
    The World Bank
    Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                                        Agreement) have been
                                                        fulfilled.
                                                        No withdrawal should be
                                                        made with respect of
                                                        Category (2), until and
                                                        unless the Recipient has
                                                        furnished evidence
                                                        satisfactory to the
                                                        Association that the PBC
                                                        for which payment is
Disbursement               TBD                                                        IBRD/IDA
                                                        requested has been
                                                        achieved as set forth in
                                                        Schedule 3 to this
                                                        Agreement and complied
                                                        with the instructions under
                                                        the Disbursement and
                                                        Financial Information
                                                        Letter.
                                                        No withdrawal shall be
                                                        made for Eligible
                                                        Expenditures under
                                                        Category (3), until and
                                                        unless the Association has
Disbursement               TBD                                                        IBRD/IDA
                                                        notified the Recipient that
                                                        the conditions set forth in
                                                        Section 5.15 (a) of the
                                                        General Conditions have
                                                        been fulfilled.




                                                                                                        vi
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



 I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
 A. Project Strategic Context

 1.     Mozambique is endowed with rich natural resources but faces substantial development challenges, including
 widespread poverty and inequality, limited job creation, and slow structural transformation. The economy remains
 heavily reliant on natural resources, with extractive industries driving growth. Frequent natural disasters undermine
 economic activity and food security, exacerbating poverty, which was projected at 74.7 percent in 2023 when measured
 by the US$2.15 poverty line. High underemployment and inequality are significant barriers to economic inclusion, while
 the informal sector, encompassing over 80 percent of the labor force, dominates the labor market, leaving many workers
 without social protection.
 2.      Economic growth slowed significantly in 2024 largely due to post-election unrest, underperformance in
 agriculture and manufacturing, and weaker investor confidence. Real GDP growth decelerated from 5.4 percent in 2023
 to 1.8 percent in 2024. The slowdown was partly driven by widespread protests and unrest following the October 2024
 general elections. Adverse weather conditions constrained agricultural output and growth in the extractive sector slowed
 down as Coral South LNG reached full capacity. Inflation continued its downward trend, easing to 3.2 percent in 2024
 from 7.1 percent in 2023, supported by stable global commodity prices, a strong Metical, and tight monetary policy. The
 current account deficit narrowed slightly to 11.3 percent of GDP, while foreign reserves strengthened to the equivalent
 of five months of imports (excluding megaprojects). However, the fiscal position deteriorated, with the deficit widening
 to 5.5 percent of GDP in 2024 driven by a large wage bill and high domestic debt service and weaker-than-expected
 revenue performance. Public debt stabilized at 92 percent of GDP in 2024. Looking ahead, growth is projected to recover
 modestly to 3 percent in 2025, but downside risks remain elevated, including delays in LNG investments, climate shocks,
 and fiscal consolidation challenges.
 3.     Mozambique is one of the most climate-vulnerable countries in the region, with its economic growth closely
 linked to climate shocks. Catastrophe risk modeling estimates average annual losses of US$440 million from floods
 alone.1 Cyclones, floods, and droughts can reduce per capita food consumption by 25–30 percent and lead to 0.4 fewer
 meals per person per day. According to Mozambique’s 2023 Country Climate and Development Report, the country’s
 location, extensive coastline, and large expanse of low-lying hinterland contribute to its vulnerability. The impacts of
 climate change are expected to increase over the next decades. Projected rising temperatures, more irregular rainfalls
 and related sea level rise will increase the frequency and intensity of droughts, floods, and cyclones. In terms of
 temperature changes, under the SSP5 8.5 scenario,2 mean temperatures are predicted to rise significantly, with
 anomalies ranging from 0.8°C over the next 20 years to 4.19°C between 2080 and 2099.” The southern provinces of
 Maputo, Gaza, and Inhambane—the areas targeted by this project are also highly exposed to these climate change–
 exacerbated climate risks. Severe and life-threatening floods and droughts are expected to occur at least once during the
 30-year lifespan of planned infrastructure due to climate change impacts.
 4.     Investments in water security have yielded substantial economic and human development benefits in
 Mozambique. In major urban centers, over two decades of consistent investment—supported by the local private
 sector—have increased mostly basic water supply access from 60 percent in 2000 to nearly 90 percent in 2020. These
 improvements contributed to a decline in child mortality, and a reduction in diarrheal disease prevalence among children
 under five. Progress in the water sector has also supported gender equality and job creation. However, the sector remains


1 World Bank. 2018. Extreme Weather and Household Well-being: Evidence from Multiple Shocks in Mozambique. Policy Research Working Paper;

No. 8667.
2 “SSP5” refers to the Shared Socioeconomic Pathway representing a fossil fuel intensive world with an additional radiative forcing of 8.5 W/m² by

the year 2100.

                                                                                                                                            Page 1
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 behind in achieving its 2030 targets of reaching universal access. The 2020 Country Private Sector Diagnostic3 found that
 insufficient basic service provision, including water and electricity, limits tourism sector opportunities, curtailing the
 geographical spread of visits, investments, and benefits. Therefore, improving water availability and reliability can boost
 the country’s economic growth and contribute to poverty eradication by increasing productivity with higher agriculture
 and industrial production and yields, time‐saving and fewer sick workers, and reduced expenditure on health care and
 treatment.

 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

 5.      A substantial share of Mozambique’s urban population still lacks access to safely managed drinking water.
 Although basic water services in urban areas reached 87 percent in 2022,4 supply remains intermittent. Many residents
 lack piped connections, with 8 percent using public standpipes and 17 percent relying on taps in neighbors’ dwellings.5,6
 None of the 21 main cities served by 15 primary systems7 have continuous supply; only 7 systems meet the Water
 Regulatory Authority’s (AURA) good performance threshold of 16 hours per day8. With an urban population growth rate
 of 4.4 percent per year9, public water services managed by state agencies are not expanding quickly enough. Private
 water providers (PWPs) are filling the gap,10 especially in peri-urban areas. In Greater Maputo, 97 percent of the
 population have access to improved water sources11, but public services cover only 49 percent12, leaving around 50
 percent reliant on mostly unlicensed PWPs13. These providers often rely on poorly drilled boreholes, increasing the risk
 of aquifer contamination, and charge tariffs 51 percent higher than the public utility, resulting in higher water costs for
 poor peri-urban households.14
 6.     Increased investment in urban water supply has not always led to improved services. The regulator’s 2023 report
 indicates that 12 of the 15 main urban water systems perform poorly.15 The 2020 Water Sector Public Expenditure
 Review16 found that from 2013 to 2018, higher investments by the Water Supply Asset Holding and Investment Fund
 (FIPAG) yielded only modest improvements in access and coincided with declining financial and operational performance.
 Currently, FIPAG is unable to service its debt due to inefficiencies within its structure and the poor performance of
 Regional Operating Companies (ROCs). Among the ROCs, collection rates below 80 percent pose financial challenges, but
 non-revenue water (NRW), averaging 50 percent, remain the primary operational issue. Reducing NRW to around 30
 percent would have a significant and positive impact on the financial sustainability of the ROCs. Although underfunding
 and rapid urban growth contribute to declining services, sustainable expansion requires moving beyond infrastructure-
 focused investment toward integrated approaches that strengthen management and institutions, with incentives to
 improve performance, and ensure WSS infrastructure is climate-resilient.


3 IFC. 2021. Country Private Sector Diagnostic. Creating Markets in Mozambique.
4 WHO (World Health Organization), and UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2020. Joint Monitoring Program – Mozambique Rural and Urban

Service Levels.
5 In 2019, standpipe usage reached 26 percent in Nampula and Angoche, the highest among urban areas (AURA 2022).
6 INE 2021. Results from the Households Budget Survey 2019/20.
7 The Greater Maputo system illustrates how a single water system can serve multiple cities, Maputo and Matola, the country’s largest centers.
8 AURA 2024. Service Regulation Report for year 2023.
9 World Bank. 2022. Data Portal. Urban population growth (annual percent) – Mozambique.
10 A 2018 survey by DNAAS identified 1,830 private water providers (PWPs) supplying piped water to 1.8 million people, primarily in urban areas of

the Southern Region, with over 75 percent—nearly 1.4 million—served in Greater Maputo.
11 INE 2020. Results from the Census 2017.
12 AURA 2022. Service Regulation Report for year 2019.
13 Only 20 percent of the private water supply systems were licensed by the end 2019.
14 In November 2021, AURA set PWP tariffs at 70 MT per cubic meter for systems connected to the power grid and 80 MT for those using diesel

generators (Resolution 3/2021). The public utility’s average tariff in Greater Maputo was set at 46.28 MT per cubic meter (Resolution 2/2021).
15 A compounded performance index below 50 percent is rated “C,” the lowest on a five-tier scale (A+, A, B+, B, and C).
16 DH Infrastructure and MB Consulting. 2020. Public Expenditure Review of the Mozambican Water Sector 2010-2018


                                                                                                                                            Page 2
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 7.      Strengthening urban water security in Mozambique requires addressing both environmental and institutional
 challenges that undermine service reliability in addition to climate change. In the Southern Region, where droughts are
 most frequent, a prolonged drought in the Umbeluzi river basin (2014–2019) severely reduced water availability, limiting
 supply in Greater Maputo to nine hours per day. In addition to reduced volumes, water quality is declining due to poor
 watershed protection, including deforestation and fertilizer use in buffer zones, affecting rivers such as the Guiua,
 Inhanombe, and Jatingue—the main source for Chibuto city. Addressing these challenges requires better hydrological
 risk management to secure water quantity and quality, stronger institutions, and greater investment in infrastructure.
 Recent investments, including expanded storage at Corumana Dam17 and Phase I of the Sabie water treatment plant
 (WTP), and supporting transport and distribution systems18, have enhanced water security in Greater Maputo19.
 However, service reliability has not improved due to unresolved utility-level operational issues, particularly a high NRW
 rate, estimated at 48 percent in 2024.20
 8.     Women and girls are mostly affected by inadequate Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) services. Despite
 socio-demographic progress and greater female participation in the economy and society, women remain “time poor”
 due to unequal household labor and the time spent fetching water from public standpipes, with one of the largest gender
 gaps in the Africa East region with women being responsible for water collection in 92 percent of households versus men
 being responsible in only 7 percent of households. With one in three women in Mozambique having experienced gender-
 based violence (GBV), lack of on-premises water access heightens their vulnerability. Evidence shows widespread fear
 and instances of GBV while collecting water or using shared latrines.
 9.    The Ministry of Public Works, Housing, and Water Resources (MOPHRH) holds overall responsibility for the
 water sector. Within MOPHRH, the National Directorate for Water Supply and Sanitation (DNAAS) leads policy
 development, planning, and investment promotion in WASH, while the National Directorate for Water Resources
 Management (DNGRH) oversees water resources management. In this sub-sector, operational management, allocation,
 conservation, and investment in water resources and related infrastructure are carried out by three Regional Water
 Administrations (ARAs) for the Southern, Central, and Northern regions.
 10.    The urban WSS sector operates under the Delegated Management Framework (DMF), which established three
 key institutions: FIPAG, the Water and Sanitation Infrastructure Administration (AIAS), and AURA. FIPAG, created during
 the DMF’s first phase, owns the main water systems serving 21 major urban areas and contracts operators for the ROCs.
 AIAS manages investments and assets in 130 small towns and district centers and oversees sanitation in both primary
 and secondary towns. AURA is responsible for economic regulation, ensuring service quality, safeguarding user interests,
 and promoting the financial sustainability of water systems.
 11.    Private sector participation in urban water operations has progressed slowly due to limited financial viability
 and operational complexity. To date, only one FIPAG system—the Greater Maputo water system21—has been
 transferred to a private operator, and it was only under a private operator for a few years, with no improvement in
 service delivery or performance despite two decades of separating operations from asset ownership. This underscores
 the need to revise the contracting strategy and accountability framework to incentivize private investment, service
 expansion, and quality improvements. Derisking the sector is also essential. Progress has been made with the approval


17 Mozambique - National Water Resources Development Project (P107350). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
18 Greater Maputo Water Supply and Expansion Project (P125120). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
19 The Umbeluzi WTP is currently the main water source, with a capacity of 240,000 cubic meters per day, followed by the Sabie WTP at 60,000 cubic

meters, and boreholes in Kongolote, Intaka, Mali, and KaTembe producing 9,400 cubic meters per day.
20 Data on key performance indicators for primary systems shared by FIPAG.
21 Between 2000 and 2010, the Greater Maputo system was run by a consortium of Águas de Portugal (AdP) and SAUR. SAUR exited in 2001 after

Bouygues Group’s decision to divest, with AdP remaining until 2010, when FIPAG acquired its shares and became the main shareholder for the state.
AdM was renamed Águas da Região de Maputo, and its lease with FIPAG ended in November 2018.

                                                                                                                                          Page 3
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 of a decree establishing a transparent framework for annual tariff adjustments based on cost recovery and affordability,
 ensuring financial equilibrium can be restored when operating conditions change.
 12.     The water sector’s medium-term investment plan is defined in the Action Plan for the Sustainable Development
 Goals (PASA, 2015–2030), the National Strategy for Urban Water and Sanitation (ENASU, 2011–2025), and the National
 Water Resources Plan (NWRP).22 Building on a consistent investment track record, the Government of Mozambique
 remains committed to scaling up investments to secure water resources, expand treatment and distribution capacity,
 improve service efficiency, and promote sustainability to achieve universal access to safely managed water. The project
 will support the implementation of PASA, ENASU and the updated investment plan for the urban water sector. The ENASU
 acknowledges the increasing challenges posed by climate change, particularly the heightened frequency and severity of
 extreme weather events such as floods and droughts. The NWRP also identifies climate change as a significant factor
 affecting water availability and distribution across Mozambique.
 13.    The Project is aligned with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Mozambique for
 FY23‐27 discussed by the Board on February 23, 2023 (Report No. 176672-MZ). The Project primarily contributes to the
 “Inclusive green job creation” (High‐Level Outcome Two) by expanding infrastructure services (objective 6). The Project
 will improve water supply services and utilities’ creditworthiness; this will also ultimately help diversify the sources of
 investment financing to meet the goal of universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all by
 2030. Water is a vital factor in production and job creation, and the project will enable the growth of micro, small, and
 medium enterprises (objective 5) operating in the water supply and contribute to job creation. The project also supports
 “More inclusive institutions” (High‐Level Outcome One) by enhancing public sector capacity for inclusive public services
 (objective 2) in the water sector and investing in institutional strengthening, including providing financial incentives for
 performance improvement of water utilities. Last, it will contribute to “Improved human capital and women
 empowerment” (High‐Level Outcome Three), supporting the improvement of selected health and education outcomes
 (objective 7) through the reduction of the lack of access to WASH at home and school that has a negative impact on
 children’s health and education, particularly for girls.
 14.     The project’s focus on climate-resilient infrastructure and adaptation aligns with Mozambique’s Nationally
 Determined Contribution (NDC). Water resources and resilient water supply and sanitation systems is one of the nine
 strategic areas for adaptation and resilience to climate change of the latest NDC submitted to the United Nations
 Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).23 On adaptation, the country commits to strengthen the early
 warning systems to floods and droughts; strengthen climate risk preparedness and response by reducing the vulnerability
 to drought in arid and semi‐arid areas, such as the southern provinces; increasing water resource management (WRM)
 capacity; increasing access to water collection, storage, treatment and distribution; promotion of low‐water consumption
 systems and waste reduction; and developing resilience mechanisms for urban areas and other settlements. On
 mitigation, the country commits to increase energy efficiency including actions for installation of solar photovoltaic
 systems for pumping water for domestic, community or public use. The project contributes to the NDC by supporting
 investments that intersect all the aforementioned areas and actions of the NDC, starting with upstream investments to
 improve WRM in the region of the country most affected by droughts, followed by investments to increase the climate
 resilience of existing and new water supply infrastructure, improvement of the performance of water supply operations
 with one third of financing exclusively dedicated to NRW reduction and energy efficiency, and by building the capacity of
 sector institutions to develop and implement plans and tools for better managing climate change exacerbated extreme
 droughts and flood events with impact on water services and infrastructure. The project also responds to Priority 2 of



22 Resolution 11/2019 from the Council of Ministers. Approval of the National Water Resources Plan.
23 Ministry of Land and Environment. 2021. Update of the First Nationally Determined Contribution to the United Nations Framework Convention

on Climate Change Mozambique. Period: 2020‐2025.

                                                                                                                                       Page 4
       The World Bank
       Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 the Mozambique Country and Climate Development Report,24 by supporting the mobilization of US$4.6 billion to improve
 WRM to address high spatial and temporal water variability, including investments in climate‐resilient water supply.



 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
 A. Project Development Objective

  15.     The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to water supply services and to improve the
  efficiency of urban water supply services.

 B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators

 16.    To ensure the achievement of the PDO, the project will address three main challenges, namely the access gap,
 the declining performance of services, and the bottlenecks in the enabling environment for private sector
 participation. Figure 1 shows the full results chain that underpins the Theory of Change for the project, which is
 structured into three main components of activities to address the three main challenges of the urban water sector,
 leading to outputs and outcomes that will contribute to the achievement of the PDO and impact on human capital,
 poverty and economic growth, improve climate resilience and strengthen sector institutions and the enabling
 environment for private sector participation.

                                      Figure 1 Theory of Change for the Urban Water Security Project




24 WBG. 2023. Mozambique Country and Climate Development Report (June 2023).


                                                                                                                           Page 5
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


17.    Successful achievement of the PDO above will be measured with the following proposed key results indicators:
           (a) People provided with at least basic water (disaggregated by female and youth sub-groups)
           (b) People benefiting from improved water services (disaggregated by female and youth sub-groups)
           (c) Operating cost recovery ratio (operating revenues collected divided by operating costs)

C. Project Beneficiaries

18.     The project is expected to directly benefit approximately 755,000 people in the main urban areas of
Mozambique. This includes some 282,000 people who will receive new household connections and 473,000 people who
are already connected, but will benefit from improved services, such as increased service hours and better water quality.
These investments are aligned with climate-resilient standards, including infrastructure designed to withstand extreme
weather events. Nearly 70 percent of the people benefiting from new connections will be from low-income households.
Part of the beneficiaries from improved service, approximately 120,000 people, will be from Private Water Providers
(PWPs) who will provide an improved water quality and service through infrastructure upgrades that enable bulk water
supply integration and compliance with technical standards. The project will also increase available treated water
production by 40,000 m³/day, improving redundancy and resilience to climate change induced droughts and floods.
19.     The project is also expected to yield indirect benefits for over 1.3 million people in the Greater Maputo
Metropolitan Area (GMMA) through improved operational performance, reduced Non-Revenue Water, enhanced
energy efficiency, and institutional capacity-building. These interventions, particularly under performance-based
programs, will enhance service continuity, support financial sustainability of utilities, and contribute to improved health
and economic outcomes. Women and girls, who bear a disproportionate burden of water collection and related health
risks, will especially benefit from reduced exposure to waterborne diseases, time savings, and reduced risks of gender-
based violence due to on-premises water access. Utilities such as the Maputo Regional Water Company (AdRMM), and
the South Region Water Company (AdRS), and the South Region Water Administration (ARA-Sul), will implement
empowerment programs aimed at increasing female participation in technical and leadership roles, contributing to long-
term sector transformation.

D. Project Components

20.     The project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) with Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs). The project will
focus on the urban areas of the country, with initial investments in the GMMA, complementing past investments from
two World Bank-financed projects to increase water storage (the National Water Resources Development Project,
P107350) and production to meet the demand (the Greater Maputo Water Supply Project, P125120) in this area. The
project will also support priority investments in WSS serving the Southern Region to improve their climate resilience
(reducing their vulnerability to droughts) and improve their efficiency and sustainability. In addition, the project will also
support the completion of ongoing WSS investments in Tete city currently financed by the Water Services and
Institutional Support Project (WASIS II, P149377) and the Mozambique Urban Sanitation Project (MUSP, P161777). The
Project’s five components are:
21.     Component 1. Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services (US$72.10 million
equivalent). The component will support a combination of interventions from source to tap to strengthen the climate
resilience and sustainability of urban water supply and sanitation services that are regularly affected by climate-change-
exacerbated droughts and floods events, contributing to the implementation of priority climate-adaptation investments
enacted in the country’s NDC, specifically under the water resources and resilient water supply and sanitation systems
strategic area. The component is structured in five sub-components, specifically:
       (a) Reducing climate hazards impacting water supply infrastructure and services through Integrated Water
           Resources Management (IWRM) and watershed management (US$2.85 million equivalent), including

                                                                                                                       Page 6
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                 providing strategic support to ARA-Sul to fulfill its mandate, covering investments that will contribute to
                 strengthening of climate-informed water planning and allocation, the enhancement of water quality through
                 improved watershed management that reduces climate-change-exacerbated water-source contamination,
                 assurance of water availability to meet urban demand via source diversification, and demand conservation.
           (b) Expansion of access to climate-resilient water supply services (US$49.60 million equivalent), including
               investments for the expansion of water treatment and transmission capacity and related compensation costs,
               as well as downstream investments to expand the distribution network following the key principles for
               climate-resilient water infrastructure design. These include key water treatment plant (WTP) investments to
               tap alternative sources to improve the climate resilience of services by reducing dependence on a single
               source; and pumping stations and bridge crossings for main pipes designed to withstand and be installed
               above historic flood levels—some of the recommended hard and soft measures for climate-proofing of water-
               supply infrastructure and service.25
           (c) Output-based payments (OBP) for low-income household connections (US$6.50 million equivalent),
               building on the successful experience of output-based payments implemented in WASIS II (P149377), aims at
               increasing access to piped water connections for low-income households in the main urban centers. Under
               this sub-component, output-based grant payments are to be provided to regional utilities to cover the costs
               of connecting low-income households.
           (d) Improvement of the quality of services provided by PWPs (US$7.65 million equivalent) through grants for
               upgrading PWP water supply infrastructure to comply with technical standards, with best practices for
               climate-proofing of operations and service, and to enable them to distribute bulk water purchased from the
               regional utilities.
           (e) Access to safely managed sanitation (US$5.50 million equivalent) financing the completion of the ongoing
               Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant in Tete currently supported by the MUSP (P161777), which will close in
               September 2025, and to support the strengthening of fecal sludge management practices in urban areas of
               Mozambique. These activities will reduce the contamination of water bodies and groundwater, as well as soil,
               thereby also lowering the potential impact of floods (from contaminated floodwaters).
 22.    Component 2. Improvement of performance and efficiency of services (US$49.35 million equivalent). The
 component will support the improvement of performance and efficiency of water supply services in the Greater Maputo
 Metropolitan Area (GMMA) and Southern Region provided by AdRMM and AdRS respectively, allocating one-third of the
 project funds to finance activities, through a grant mechanism, that will contribute to lower energy consumption and
 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, specifically NRW reduction26 and energy efficiency improvements. This will allow the
 supported utilities to not only make their services more reliable, but also to start putting aside funding for operations
 and maintenance, asset management, and climate proofing of its infrastructure. The component is structured in four
 sub-components, specifically:
           (a) Performance improvement for the service area of the GMMA (US$12 million equivalent).27 Carrying out a
               performance-based program of activities defined under a Performance Improvement Action Plan (PIAP) for
               the GMMA, which include investments for: (i) NRW reduction led by the utility; (ii) improving energy
               efficiency; (iii) improving the collection ratio and the operational cost recovery ratio; (iv) digitalization of
               operations; (v) training and capacity building in key areas for the utilities; (vi) women empowerment within
               AdRMM; (vii) improving the utility’s governance and accountability, and trust with citizens and consumers;

25 WBG. 2020. Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief. Link: http://hdl.handle.net/10986/34448
26 NRW reduction will also contribute to adaptation, by making more water available throughout the year.
27 At least 30 percent of the PIAP allocation will be dedicated to NRW interventions, and another 30 percent for energy efficiency interventions.



                                                                                                                                                    Page 7
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                 and (viii) establishment of communications platforms for information sharing on water quality and services
                 and timely resolution of complaints. To incentivize the achievement of performance improvement results, the
                 financing of this subcomponent is linked to PBC 1: Improved performance of water supply services in the
                 Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area.
           (b) Performance improvement for the Southern Region service area (US$10.5 million equivalent).28 Carrying
               out a performance-based program of activities defined under a PIAP for the Southern Region, which include
               investments for: (i) co-management contract for NRW reduction; (ii) improving energy efficiency; (iii)
               improving the collection ratio and the operational cost recovery ratio; (iv) digitalization of operations; (v)
               training and capacity building; (vi) women empowerment; (vii) improving utility’s governance and
               accountability, and trust with citizens and consumers; and (viii) establishment of communications platforms
               for information sharing on water quality and services and timely resolution of complaints. To incentivize the
               achievement of performance improvement results, the financing of this subcomponent is linked to
               PBC 2: Improved performance of water supply services in the Southern Region.
           (c) Performance-based financing for NRW reduction in GMMA and Southern Region (US$25 million
               equivalent). Performance-based contract for NRW reduction in the GMMA and Co-Management Contract for
               NRW reduction in Southern Region to be signed between FIPAG and a contractor to be selected on a
               competitive basis to implement investments to reduce NRW, including investments to reduce both physical
               and commercial losses, management technologies, and capacity-building program.
           (d) Revolving fund for a prepaid meter program (US$1.85 million equivalent). Investigating and potentially
               supporting the acquisition of pre-paid meters to be installed for consumers segments with high water bills
               and low billing collection ratios to support the desired improvement in operational cost recovery based on
               collections.
 23.    Component 3. Water sector development support (US$14.26 million equivalent). This component will support
 several critical actions underpinning the sector reform effort led by the Government of Mozambique (GoM) to improve
 the enabling environment for PSP and to achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water.
 This component will be divided into three sub-components, specifically:
           (a) Improvement of the enabling environment for Private Sector Participation (US$0.50 million equivalent),
               which will support the development of the legal framework for the integration of PWP services into the
               regulated service provision (the development of technical standards, including best practices for climate-
               proofing of operations and service, and bulk water supply models), including the licensing and monitoring of
               water quality and services, and the dissemination and training of licensing authorities to ensure downwards
               accountability and robust systems of citizen feedback on the performance of the PWPs.
           (b) Strengthening AURA’s regulatory role (US$2 million equivalent) to promote efficiency and inclusiveness in
               the provision of services by extending them to the poorest segments of the population and reducing the risk
               of investment in the sector through economic regulation that guarantees tariffs that fully cover operating
               costs, debt service, and a return on private investment, and ensure service to low-income households. To
               ensure that tariffs issued by the regulator reflect the principle of full cost recovery, i.e. they are sufficient to
               cover operating expenses, depreciation, and cost of capital in a reasonable time horizon, the financing of this
               subcomponent is linked to PBC 3: Publication of annual resolution on tariff review that secures the
               sustainability of operations issued and annual services performance report for the previous civil year
               published.


28 At least 30 percent of the PIAP allocation will be dedicated to NRW interventions, and another 30 percent for energy efficiency interventions.



                                                                                                                                                    Page 8
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


       (c) Strengthen ARA-Sul capacity to manage water resources (US$3.36 million equivalent) including licensing of
           water users, strengthening of management and ARA-Sul’s financial sustainability, capacity building, including
           in climate-risk prevention, management and response, institutional development support including the
           construction and equipping of its operational and water quality laboratory, and the implementation of a
           women empowerment program.
       (d) Institutional development support for FIPAG (US$4.95 million equivalent). This sub-component will support
           FIPAG in managing the process of restructuring the urban water supply sector, including strengthening it to
           be an institution focused on mobilizing funds for investment in the sector, migrating from its previous focus
           on operations, and strengthening private sector participation and private capital mobilization for urban water
           supply.
       (e) Preparatory studies for the next generation of WSS investments (US$3.45 million equivalent) will allocate
           resources to support the preparation of the future generation of priority investments in WSS.
24.    Component 4. Project Management Support (US$7.29 million equivalent) will support technical assistance and
incremental project operational costs for the two Project Implementation Units (PIU) based in FIPAG and DNAAS, and
the Project Technical Units (PTU) based in ARA-Sul and AURAS. It will also provide additional support for environmental
and social standards compliance.
25.    Project management support comprises technical assistance and incremental operating costs to ensure fiduciary
compliance including financial management (FM), procurement, environment and social standards, and monitoring and
evaluation (M&E). This component will support necessary equipment (e.g. computers, software and other goods),
capacity building (training), and incremental staff to allow the project implementing unit to carry out their
responsibilities.
       (a) Project Management Support for FIPAG (US$5.20 million equivalent) to ensure technical, environmental and
           social, and fiduciary compliance, including financial management (FM), procurement, monitoring and
           evaluation (M&E) and compliance with the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and other
           Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) instruments. This component will support necessary equipment
           (e.g. computers, software and other goods), capacity building (training), travel, logistics and incremental staff
           to allow the PIU to carry out their responsibilities related to the project.
       (b) Technical Assistance and Project management support for DNAAS (US$2.09 million equivalent) to ensure
           technical, environmental and social, and fiduciary compliance, including financial management (FM) and
           procurement, M&E and compliance with the ESCP and other ESF instruments. This component will support
           necessary equipment (e.g. computers, software and other goods), capacity building (training), travel, logistics
           and incremental staff to allow the PIU to carry out their responsibilities related to the project. It will also
           support technical assistance and incremental operating costs for the two implementation PTUs based in ARA-
           Sul and AURAS.
26.     Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million equivalent) to provide immediate response to an
eligible crisis or emergency, as needed.
27.     Use of Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs). The project includes a results-based financing element, with part
of the disbursement conditional on the achievement of PBCs. The use of PBCs is intended to strengthen the project’s
results orientation by linking financing to measurable outcomes in utility performance and service delivery, rather than
solely input-based expenditures. This approach aligns with the World Bank’s guidance for Investment Project Financing
with Performance-Based Conditions (IPF-PBC) and supports the implementation of strategic reforms to improve water
sector sustainability and resilience, as follows:


                                                                                                                     Page 9
       The World Bank
       Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


        (a) The rationale for using PBCs in this operation is to incentivize strengthening services and institutions, and
            improvements in utility operations, including reductions in non-revenue water, increased energy efficiency,
            improved revenue collection, and enhanced service quality and customer engagement. PBCs also reinforce
            institutional development, particularly in governance, digitalization, and gender inclusion, areas which often
            require additional effort beyond standard investment inputs. Disbursements will be linked to the achievement
            of the PBC targets for the NRW reduction, and for the implementation of the Greater Maputo and Southern
            Region PIAPs.
        (b) The volume of financing linked to PBCs totals US$24.5 million equivalent, corresponding to activities under
            sub-components 2a, 2b, and 3b. Specific expenditures include investments in NRW reduction, energy
            efficiency, digitalization, training, and other performance-related areas, detailed in the PBC and Expenditure
            Composition Table in Annex 1.
        (c) Verification of PBC achievement will be undertaken by an Independent Verification Agent (IVA) and follow
            protocols detailed in Annex 1. Disbursement is contingent on both eligible expenditures and verified results.
            For scalable PBCs, partial disbursements will be made based on the proportion of targets achieved.

 E. Role of Partners
Several development partners have expressed interest in continued engagement in the urban water supply sector. The
new operation offers opportunities for building on this collaboration, particularly in infrastructure investment and
private sector participation (Table 1).

                                                 Table 1 Role of Partners

 Name of Partner             Nature of Involvement /Description
 French Development          Indicated interest in financing activities to expand water production and distribution
 Agency (AfD)                capacity in the GMMA with focus on KaTembe area (Component 1).
 International Finance       Supported preparation of the parent program (Urban Water Security PforR, P178653) by
 Corporation (IFC)           advising on enabling environment for private sector participation (PSP) that were captured
                             by this project. IFC may extend this support under this project, particularly in a BOT for the
                             infrastructure investment and private sector participation.

 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design

28.    The design of this operation reflects key lessons from the ongoing Mozambique Urban Water Security Program
(MUWS, P178653), implemented under a Program-for-Results (PforR) financing instrument. While the PforR achieved
progress in institutional reforms and initial results in several Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs), implementation was
constrained by delays and limitations inherent to the use of Government systems for financial management and
procurement.
29.     After one year of effectiveness, disbursement under the PforR remained at five percent, primarily due to delayed
fund allocation through the national financial system (e-SISTAFE), restrictions on contracting in foreign currency, and
challenges in accessing foreign exchange for importing materials. These factors significantly impeded infrastructure
investments, including large-scale works such as the Sabie Water Treatment Plant. To overcome these constraints, and
in recognition of the investment-intensive nature of the program, the Investment Project Financing instrument is used
for this project, allowing for the use of the World Bank’s fiduciary systems. The shift enables the executing agencies to
contract in multiple currencies, make direct international payments, and utilize the World Bank’s procurement systems
for greater efficiency and timely implementation.
                                                                                                                    Page 10
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


30.    In addition, the project design incorporates Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)—building on the PforR’s use of
DLIs—to maintain a strong results orientation. The use of Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) linked to
disbursement has proven effective in incentivizing improvements in utility performance and institutional strengthening.
These mechanisms are retained in the IPF to ensure continuity in driving operational efficiency and service delivery
outcomes.
31.     The PforR experience also reinforced the need for technical assistance and capacity building to support
implementing agencies in procurement, financial management, and results monitoring. These elements have been
strengthened in the new operation through dedicated support under the project’s management and institutional
development components. Furthermore, the importance of climate resilience, gender inclusion, and private sector
participation—highlighted in the PforR’s implementation—have been integrated into the project’s design to ensure
inclusive, sustainable, and resilient service delivery.
32.      The OBP for low-income households was an effective and efficient mechanism to provide incentives for the
utilities to extend the service to low-income households at a low cost. Under WASIS II, 80,000 low-income households
were connected at a unit cost of US$70 per connection. OBP design adopted an arrangement on which half of the
payment was made after a period of six months if the connection remained active, ensuring that the utilities make an
extra effort to keep the low-income households connected and introducing the possibility of payment in installments.


III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION


A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

33.     The project will be implemented by MOPHRH at the central level through several of its subordinated
institutions. FIPAG, DNAAS, AURA, and ARA-Sul will be responsible for implementing various components, consistent
with their respective mandates. Specifically, FIPAG will lead the implementation of water supply infrastructure and
performance improvement activities, while DNAAS will oversee activities related to private water providers, regulatory
strengthening activities benefiting AURA, the project’s water resources management (WRM) and watershed components
benefiting ARA-Sul.
34.    A PIU will be hosted by FIPAG, which is mandated under Government Decree 72/1998 to plan and manage the
design and execution of water supply infrastructure for primary systems. This makes FIPAG the most suitable agency to
deliver the project’s water supply components. DNAAS will host a second PIU, while the beneficiary institutions, AURA
and ARA-Sul, will host PTUs responsible for technical implementation of institution-specific activities, under the
coordination and fiduciary oversight of the DNAAS PIU. DNAAS will make use of the PIU currently serving the Rural and
Small Towns Water Security Project (Água Segura, P173518).
35.     Fiduciary arrangements. The two PIUs will manage procurement and financial management related to their
activities. The two agencies hosting the PIU have experience with World Bank fiduciary procedures, with FIPAG currently
implementing the WASIS II (P149377), and DNAAS currently implementing the MUSP (P161777) and the Agua Segura
(P173518). A Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) was prepared, led by FIPAG and DNAAS. The project
will apply the World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers (March 2025, as revised). Technical assistance will
be provided to address any capacity gaps identified during project appraisal. Procurement risk is rated Substantial, and
mitigation measures are proposed in the Project Procurement Strategy for Development.




                                                                                                                Page 11
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements

36.     Results monitoring will be led by the PIU at FIPAG, with support from the DNAAS PIU, and AURA and ARA-Sul PTUs.
The PIUs will consolidate monitoring data and report on project progress, including on Performance-Based Conditions
(PBCs), using the agreed Results Framework. Monitoring activities will include regular progress reports, quarterly Interim
Financial Reports (IFRs), and annual implementation reviews. PBC verification will be conducted by an independent
verification agent, following a Verification Protocol (VP) to be finalized by grant effectiveness. Disbursements linked to
PBCs will be contingent on the verification of results against agreed targets, with partial disbursement allowed for
scalable PBCs. Project data will be reviewed during supervision missions and mid-term reviews. The PIU will ensure timely
submission of monitoring data and results reports to the World Bank.

C. Disbursement Arrangements

37.     Project funds will be disbursed through two designated accounts (DA) managed by FIPAG and DNAAS, with
allocations to implementing agencies based on approved work plans and budgets. Disbursements will follow the terms
outlined in the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter (DFIL), including eligible expenditures and performance-
based conditions. The project will use standard disbursement methods, including direct payment, reimbursement, and
advances. Disbursements for activities linked to Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) will be contingent on the
verification of results, with funds released upon confirmation of achievement. For scalable PBCs, partial disbursements
will be made proportional to the level of target achievement. FIPAG and DNAAS will submit quarterly IFRs and annual
audited financial statements. Detailed disbursement arrangements and thresholds will be specified in the DFIL.


IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY

A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis

Technical Analysis
38.    The project supports the Government of Mozambique in improving the reliability, sustainability, and efficiency
of urban water supply services. The technical design is grounded in lessons from prior World Bank-financed operations
and integrates climate-resilient infrastructure standards, including elevated pipe crossings, energy efficiency measures,
and protocols for climate-proofing.
39.    The World Bank is well placed to finance and support the project since given its long-standing partnership with
the Government of Mozambique in the water supply and sanitation sub-sectors. The World Bank supported the
preparation of key strategic documents for the development of the sector including the ENASU and PASA. The World
Bank has equally been very active and is the main funding source for investment in urban water supply in large cities. The
project benefits from the implementation of the UoF in both AdRMM and AdRS. The implementation of the UoF enabled
the identification and prioritization of turnaround and performance improvement activities that can be financed by the
project. The World Bank is best placed to take these initiatives to scale through the integration and coordination of
technical support across multiple stakeholders and investments at multiple locations.
40.    In terms of readiness, institutional strengthening and performance improvement activities planned for this project
will benefit from recent analytical work (the PIR and PER, which identified critical and priority areas of reforms), and the
UoF turnaround strategies. It will also benefit from the support for the creation and operationalization of water utilities
supported by the World Bank through the WASIS II Project. Thus, the project will complement WASIS II, providing
additional incentives, through performance-based financing, for improvement of utility performance and sustainability


                                                                                                                    Page 12
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


of service. The design of key water infrastructure investments was procured and is being financed with the available
funds to prepare the next generation of water projects from the Rural and Small Towns Water Security Project (P173518).
41.    For water supply, the benefits of the project will include, primarily, financial and time savings for households,
especially poor women, and other consumers connecting to the piped water system. The project will also result in
improved efficiency in the operation of the targeted systems and operators, reduced average operational costs and
improved operational cost recovery, although these are likely to be minor relative to the benefits accrued to households
and commercial users. It is expected that the project will also produce benefits in the form of improved health and
reduced associated costs, especially time costs for women, and greater security of supply due to the diversification of
water supply assets, although quantification of these is not planned as part of the economic analysis.
42.     Financing. The large market failures that exist in the country, coupled with the large capital investments required
for rehabilitating and expanding water supply infrastructure, justify public sector financing. Water supply is a classic case
for public-sector provision as it is a natural monopoly. Public sector financing will address water supply market failures
and the issue of increasing demand for service provision infrastructure due to rapid population growth. Public-sector
investments will also contribute to leveraging private financing, which will be required to expand water supply
infrastructure and services.
43.    Economic analysis. An economic analysis of the expected capital investments to be made with proceeds from the
Project has been undertaken. While it is not possible at this time to undertake an analysis of the funds dedicated to the
completion of investments in the city of Tete (which is served by a separate regional water company), the economic
analysis looks at the economic rate of return of the US$75.85 million invested in AdRMM and US$15.25 million invested
in AdRS. For AdRMM, the project investments will expand water supply, extend water supply to unsupplied areas,
subsidize (through output-based assistance) household connections for low-income households, invest in efficiency
investments to reduce non-revenue water and improve electric efficiency, and invest in related capacity development.
For AdRS, the project focuses on investments to reduce non-revenue water and improve electric efficiency and in related
capacity development. Cost-benefit analyses have been undertaken for investments in the two recipient operating
companies, comparing with and without-investment scenarios. Operating and financial projections were prepared based
on current operating and financial parameters and performance and then incorporating expected changes in operating
costs and revenues resulting from the program investments. In addition, beneficiary time savings and consumer surplus
were calculated and incorporated into the analysis.
44.     It is expected that the project will also produce benefits in the form of improved health and reduced associated
costs, especially time costs for women in the care of ill family members, and greater security of supply due to the
diversification of water supply assets, although estimates of these benefits were not included in the analysis.
45.    The Project generates solid economic returns. Current-value costs and benefits were projected over a 25-year
period, and net present value (NPV) was calculated at a 6 percent discount rate. The results indicated a combined Internal
Rate of Return (IRR) of 17.4 percent and a benefit-cost ratio of 1.47. The results are provided in Table 2.

                                           Table 2 Results of Economic Analysis

                                                 NPV
                                                                                  IRR                Benefit-cost ratio
                                       (6 percent discount rate)
   Combined                                US$117.4 million                 17.4 percent                    1.47


46.    Estimates of GHG reductions have been carried out. These indicate that the Project is expected to generate net
reductions in GHG emissions of approximately 219,681 tCO2-eq (a 63 percent decrease in emissions from the baseline

                                                                                                                     Page 13
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


scenario), through energy efficiency gains and physical NRW reductions at the Sabié WTP and through changes in energy
usage by households with new connections through AdRMM. Gross project-related GHG emissions were estimated to be
126,797 tCO2-eq over the life of the project, versus baseline emissions of 346,478 tCO2-eq. On an annual basis, this
translates to annual average reductions of 8,787 tCO2-eq.
47.    Incorporating the value of the reductions into the economic analysis results in an ERR of 20.4 percent using the
low-range shadow price of GHG emissions and an ERR of 20.9 percent using the high value. Results are summarized in
Table 3.

                   Table 3 Results of Economic Analysis incorporating the value of emission reductions

                                                                                                 Incorporating the High
                                                          Incorporating the Low Value of
                                                                                                    Value of tCO2-eq
                                  Economic Analysis            tCO2-eq Reductions
                                                                                                       Reductions
                                                                 (US$52 in 2024)
                                                                                                    (US$103 in 2024)
   ERR (percentage)                      19.8                           20.4                              20.9
   NPV (at 6% discount rate)       US$136.8 million              US$143.2 million                   US$149.7 million

48.     Paris Alignment: The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both adaptation and mitigation
goals. Mozambique prioritizes climate-resilient infrastructure and adaptation as highlighted in its updated 2021 NDC,
particularly for “water resources and resilient WSS systems” as well as mitigation through the promotion of renewable
energy sources including solar and increasing energy efficiency. On mitigation, project activities are on the Universally
Aligned List (UAL) and pose no risks of carbon lock-in as no major emissive infrastructure is planned. Specific activities
include energy efficiency measures, NRW reduction, and the introduction of renewable energy (displacing the use of
fossil fuel–powered back-up generators). On adaptation, the inherent climate risks are floods, droughts, cyclones, and
extreme heat; and project activities will include NRW reduction, climate proofing of WSS infrastructure, flood-proofing
sanitation infrastructure, and boosting climate-resilient institutional capacity, among others. Thus, the project will reduce
the residual climate risks to an acceptable level and not pose a material risk to operations.

B. Fiduciary

Procurement
49.    Procurement under the project will be governed by the World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers
dated February 2025 and amended from time to time (Procurement Regulations) and the provisions of the Financing
Agreement. In addition, the Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD
Loans and IDA Credits and Grants (dated October 15, 2006, and revised in January 2011 and July 2016) will apply.
50.    The implementation of the project will rest with FIPAG and DNAAS, with DNAAS having been designated to
oversee the implementation of its own component activities, as well as the activities benefiting AURA and ARA-Sul. AURA
and ARA-Sul will be responsible for drafting their Terms of Reference and Technical Specifications, as well as leading in
the evaluation of their respective procurement opportunities and on the contract management, following DNAAS having
discharged the fiduciary role.
51.    A procurement capacity assessment of both FIPAG and DNAAS was conducted during project preparation. Both
FIPAG and DNAAS possess considerable experience with the World Bank fiduciary requirements and there is solid capacity
to implement the project. Nevertheless, to address the likelihood of the project activities adversely impacting on the


                                                                                                                     Page 14
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


existing capacity, both FIPAG and DNAAS may temporarily enhance their capacity through the recruitment of technical
assistance procurement consultants, hence the overall risk for procurement being rated as Substantial.
52.     The Implementing Agencies led the preparation of the Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD),
which identified the capacity gaps, and reviewed the market for envisaged activities under the project, which informed
the Project Procurement Plan. The procurement Plan has been prepared and includes the best approaches to ensure
efficient and fit-for-purpose implementation of project activities. The PPSD has identified that the activities, Sabie Water
Treatment Plant; and Water Leakages reduction Works, costing more than US$10million will require that FIPAG conducts
an Early Market Engagement and provides for the associated methodology.
53.    World Bank-issued Standard Procurement Document will be used for all activities subject to open international
procurement. To ensure that Open National procurement does incorporate the World Bank’s Environment and Social
requirements, the project will use World Bank standard procurement documents for Goods and Works that have been
translated by the World Bank for use in Mozambique.
Financial Management
54.    Overall, the proposed Financial Management arrangements for the Project were assessed as satisfactory and,
with the adoption of proposed risk mitigating measures, residual FM risk is assessed as Moderate. A Financial
Management assessment was conducted at PIU-DNAAS and FIPAG, the project implementing agencies, to evaluate
whether the proposed project financial management arrangements will provide reasonable assurance that World Bank
provided funds are used for the intended purposes.
55.     Assurance that the World Bank provided funds will be used for the purposes intended can be provided through
ensuring this flow through the same public financial management (PFM) systems a country uses for the management
of its overall budget, provided these are assessed as being sound overall. With respect to Mozambique, the World
Bank's assessment is that there are several critical gaps in the areas of budget reliability, transparency of public finances,
management of assets and liabilities, policy-based fiscal strategy and budgeting, predictability and control in budget
execution, accounting and reporting, and external audit and legislative scrutiny as reported in Mozambique Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability 2021. In addition, Mozambique's 2023 Budget Index score is 45, while for
Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index 2024, the country's score is 25 and ranking 146. As a result of
these systemic weaknesses, reliance will be placed only on the country's SAI, the Administrative Tribunal, for the auditing
project financial statements. However, a private audit firm may be engaged as the Tribunal has not been able to deliver
audits within the six months after the end of fiscal year period as required by the World Bank because it has been facing
challenges since FY 2022.
56.    In tandem with Mozambique continuing to implement reforms to strengthen its overall PFM systems, DNAAS
and FIPAG have agreed to implement additional project specific arrangements to mitigate risks relating to weaknesses
in Mozambique existing PFM arrangements. These are: (i) Develop and adopt the Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
including FM procedures; (ii) FIPAG to customize the accounting packages by creating codes to maintain separate records
and ledger accounts for the project; (iii) DNAAS to appoint Project Accountant with skills and qualifications acceptable to
the World Bank; (iv) appoint independent verification agent; and (v) DNAAS to Purchase and install automated accounting
package.
57.     A project implementation manual (PIM) will be prepared by the PIU-DNAAS and FIPAG that will specify in detail
arrangements for project financial management. The PIM would be prepared and adopted not later than 30 days after
effectiveness. The PIM will include: the preparation and submission to the World Bank, within 45 days after the quarter
end, of quarterly unaudited interim financial reports; the preparation of annual financial statements subject to audit by
an independent external auditor, acceptable to the World Bank, and the submission of these to the World Bank along
with a management letter, no later than six months after the end of each fiscal year-end.

                                                                                                                      Page 15
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies

58.     The project seeks to improve urban water supply access, efficiency, and resilience through investments in
infrastructure and institutional strengthening across the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area and selected cities in Gaza
and Inhambane provinces. While the project offers significant development benefits, including enhanced service delivery
and climate adaptation, it presents environmental and social risks that require careful identification, mitigation, and
monitoring under the World Bank’s ESF.
59.    Relevance of ESS. ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts is relevant
to the project as it includes significant civil works across Components 1 and 2. ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions as
the project activities will require a varied workforce, including direct, contracted, and primary supply workers. ESS3 -
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management as the construction works will require the use of natural
resources, management of pollutants, and disposal of hazardous and nonhazardous wastes. ESS4 - Community Health
and Safety is relevant given the range of potential risks to community health and safety associated with both construction
and operational phases of large-scale water infrastructure. ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and
Involuntary Resettlement as the implementation of infrastructure investments may lead to both physical and economic
displacement. ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural is relevant given that some
subprojects may be implemented near or within ecologically sensitive areas, including wetlands, forests, riverbanks, and
other habitats with biodiversity significance. ESS8 - Cultural Heritage is relevant due to the potential presence of tangible
and intangible cultural heritage in areas where infrastructure works—such as pipeline expansions, storage upgrades, and
water treatment facilities—will take place. ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure is relevant given
the project's diverse stakeholders and complex urban and peri-urban settings.
60.     Environmental risks are primarily linked to infrastructure development and include soil erosion, dust generation,
noise emissions, surface water contamination, and traffic disruptions during construction. Ancillary facilities, such as
access roads, contractor camps, laydown areas, and staging zones, may introduce additional environmental and social
risks and will be assessed in accordance with ESS1. The project will comply with Mozambique’s EIA Decree No. 54/2015
and the World Bank’s ESF through the preparation of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for substantial-risk subprojects. Climate risk screening has been
conducted, and all infrastructure will be designed to withstand climate-related shocks such as floods and droughts,
ensuring long-term sustainability.
61.    The social risk profile is substantial due to potential physical and economic displacement, labor influx, and
exposure to SEA/SH. Land acquisition for pipeline expansion, water treatment plants, and storage facilities may lead to
resettlement. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared and disclosed to guide the development of
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), with particular attention to vulnerable groups and informal occupants. Economic
displacement may result from impacts on informal vendors or farmers, particularly where access restrictions or
temporary closures occur during construction. The project will support livelihood restoration and adopt measures to
ensure inclusive participation in benefit-sharing mechanisms.
62.     FIPAG, AdRMM, and AdRS will receive technical support to strengthen their Environmental and Social
Management Units (ESMUs). The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) provides a capacity-building
program, while the ESCP ensures the development and implementation of an Environmental and Social Management
System (ESMS) with World Bank support. The project will align its environmental and social risk management system with
the ESF. An ESMF, LMP, RPF, SEP, SEA/SH Action Plan, and capacity-building measures were prepared, consulted on
March 22, 2025, to mitigate risks, share benefits, and ensure sustainable outcomes. The project’s environmental and
social documents were disclosed on April 21, 2025 by the client, and on April 22, 2025 by the World Bank.



                                                                                                                     Page 16
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                        PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies                                                               Triggered?
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                              Yes
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                        No




63.     OP 7.50 is applicable to this operation because it will finance activities that may use or risk polluting waters of
international waterways. For activities that are carried over from the Mozambique Urban Water Security PforR
(P178653), the requisite process was already undertaken as per OP 7.50 requirements. Accordingly, the World Bank
Management provided their approval to proceed on July 6, 2023, following the completion of riparian notification process
for the investments relying on the Incomati River system as well as their approval of the exception to the notification
requirement under paragraph 7 (c) for activities relying on the Limpopo River system, and under paragraph 7 (a) for
activities relying on the Umbeluzi River system. This project will also finance the completion of two ongoing works to be
able to close the financing gap from two other operations. For the Tete Water Distribution Network under WASIS II
Project (P149377), OP 7.50 was triggered as investments relied on the Zambezi River and the Pungwe River systems. The
exception to the notification requirement as per paragraph 7(a) of the policy was approved by the RVP on March 3, 2015.
For the second work, namely, the Tete Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant under MUSP (P161777), riparian notification was
conducted in accordance with OP 7.50 since activities relied on the Zambezi River system. Based on the outcome of the
notification process and the assessment that the Project will not cause appreciable harm, the World Bank Management
gave their approval to proceed on February 15, 2019.
D. Gender and Citizen Engagement
64.     Gender diversity and inclusion. Women are particularly affected by lack of access to basic services and are
typically most impacted by poor public service provisions, in particular lack of household water. Improving access to basic
services such as water supply will benefit women by enhancing sanitary conditions and improving productivity, with
particular benefits stemming from reduced time to collect water, as women are responsible for water collection in 92
percent of Mozambican households compared to only seven percent for men, and at least 37 percent of households
spend more than 30 minutes a day collecting water. Women may also be more exposed to violence at water collection
points. Gender-sensitive actions to be taken under the project include: (i) ensuring women’s participation in all aspects
of the project; (ii) use of gender-sensitive approaches and methods, including public information events targeted at
women; (iii) collection and monitoring of gender-disaggregated data on project beneficiaries; (iv) assessing impacts of
the project interventions on women and female-headed beneficiaries; and (v) measuring the impact on time saved for
women who receive water and sanitation services.
65.     The Project will help to advance gender equity in AdRMM, AdRS and ARA-Sul. Results of the development of the
MOPHRH’s Gender Strategy (approved in 2024) and from the UoF assessment pointed to opportunities for women’s
empowerment. For both utilities, to address these opportunities the Project will support a targeted recruitment program
for young female science, technology, engineering, and mathematics professionals and the training of female staff. Under
Component 2, the utilities (AdRMM, and AdRS) and FIPAG, and under Sub-Component 3.3 ARA‐Sul will promote gender
diversity and inclusion. The ability for the utilities to address gender inequality and social inclusion in their programs will
be strengthened by improving their own gender diversity and development of a fairer mechanism for assigning the social
tariff by integrating other relevant parameters, such as proof of social protection beneficiary. The Project will support
the different implementing agencies in their Inclusion, Gender, Equal Opportunities and Treatment and Workplace
Violence Prevention and Response Program, particularly actions envisioned under the 2022–2032 action plan, and the
                                                                                                                       Page 17
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 MOPHRH’s Gender Strategy. This action plan constitutes a cross‐cutting approach applied to all implementing agency
 programs. It will focus on improving working conditions for ARA‐Sul, FIPAG, AdRMM, and AdRS employees and
 particularly on promoting equal career advancement opportunities for women, with the goal of increasing female
 representation in decision‐making positions.
 66.     To accomplish its gender and diversity goals related to career advancement, ARA‐Sul, FIPAG, AdRMM, and AdRS
 will introduce targets for gender diversity in promotions, particularly to management positions. ARA‐Sul, FIPAG,
 AdRMM, and AdRS have found that strong gender norms on the type of work that is considered appropriate for women
 tend to deter them from applying to technical and managerial positions. For this reason, it is launching targeted
 communications behavioral change campaigns to motivate women to apply to such opportunities and for GBV/SEA/SH
 prevention. Also, it offers internal and external staff targeted junior internship training programs to fill existing capacity
 gaps in women’s existing technical and leadership skills. Through these actions, FIPAG, AdRMM and AdRS aim to increase
 the percentage of women in managerial positions and promote the empowerment of women by integrating them into
 technical activities usually not assigned to women. Given the large number of employees, and taking into account the
 current recruitment rates, as well as new promotions targets, the utilities intend to achieve a gradual but steady increase
 in women’s representation in managerial positions29—from 26 to 32 percent—which in turn, is expected to contribute to
 improving the utilities capacity to respond to the differential impacts and needs of women and men in its emergency
 response efforts.
 67.     Citizen engagement. A citizen engagement and feedback process will be established by the project to ensure that
 any complaints about the project or the performance of the supported utilities can be effectively addressed. This process
 includes not only dedicated public consultation events, but also improved operational customer complaint systems, to
 be supported under project capacity building. In addition, AURA conducts and publishes the results of customers
 satisfaction surveys. Under the WASIS II Project, AURA developed and implemented a “Citizen Voice” tool to facilitate
 the submission of service complaints, and its follow up. During the UoF assessment, AdRMM and AdRS have recognized
 the importance of improving and updating their capacity for better engagement with citizens, and of investing in the
 internal systems that will facilitate better tracking, management, and analysis, and therefore accountability and
 responsiveness around citizen complaints and feedback. The Project will finance the institutionalization of robust
 complaints and feedback mechanism – ensuring improved effectiveness, accessibility, responsiveness, and transparency
 in the two utilities (Component 2), and at ARA‐Sul (sub-Component C3.3), respectively.
 68.     Social inclusion. The UoF assessment identified that both AdRMM and AdRS have low levels of service inclusion
 and transparency. To respond to this weakness, under sub-Component 3.2, the sector Regulator will develop procedures
 to secure that (i) the voice and views of vulnerable groups, specifically persons with disability, are considered in decisions
 affecting them, including tariff studies and reviews; and (ii) sets and secure the enforcement of minimal requirements
 for disability inclusive billing systems, customer service policies and procedures. The Project will also support the
 development and implementation of a sector policy and program to proactively recruit persons with disabilities
 (Component 3).
 69.     Job creation. Investments in water and sanitation infrastructure create jobs during construction and operation,
 which can benefit youth and women. The employment impact of the water sector ranges from 10 to 25 jobs created per
 million dollars of capital investment.30 Therefore, considering the capital investment of the project, US$104.1 million, and
 20 jobs created per million dollars invested, it is estimated that 2,082 jobs will be created. Access to improved water



29 To monitor the implementation of Program activities on gender, the following indicator was adopted: women’s representation in managerial

positions (percent).
30 Tricas, M. and Liner, B. 2021. A framework for improving economic analysis of water reuse opportunities. International Journal of Environmental

Policy and Decision Making.

                                                                                                                                          Page 18
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


services will be an enabling factor for the establishment of small-scale industries in peri-urban areas, increasing
employment opportunities and improving local productivity.
70.     The project is in line with the World Bank's Maximizing Finance for Development approach. The following
components are verified as MFD-e: Component 2 supports the improvement of performance and efficiency of services,
including investments in NRW reduction, energy efficiency, increasing collection rates, which together will contribute to
increasing the operating cost coverage ratio (PDO indicator) above 100 percent, thereby enabling the utilities to improve
their creditworthiness and thus qualify to access private financing to support the expansion of water supply services.
Component 3 will support the development of the legal framework to improve the enabling environment for PSP (tracked
by the intermediate indicator "Policies approved and published"), including the approval of technical standards for PWP
systems and the development of a bulk water supply model to ensure that private operators are fairly compensated for
investing in reticulation systems to distribute treated bulk water received by the private utilities.
71.    Private investment generated by the project will be counted under Private Capital Enabling. Sub-component 3a
will support the licensing of 400 PWP systems (non-monetary indicator: number of PWP systems licensed). At a unit
investment of US$50,000 per system, the licensing of 400 systems will leverage US$20 million in private investment. The
project will support this private investment through matching grants to ensure that PWP systems meet technical
standards for service delivery.


E. Grievance Redress Services:

 72.    Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
 supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
 Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
 project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
 independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm
 occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute
 Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through
 dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to
 the attention of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information
 on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For
 information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit
 https://accountability.worldbank.org.


V. KEY RISKS

73.   The overall risk of the proposed project is rated Moderate. The overall moderate risk rating reflects the
implementation risks resulting from low risks for institutional capacity and stakeholders; moderate risk for political and
governance, macroeconomic, technical design; and substantial risk for fiduciary and environmental and social.
74.    Fiduciary risk is rated as Substantial. FIPAG and DNAAS have experience managing World Bank-financed projects.
However, the PPSD has identified risk of low quality of procurement processes as a result of insufficient levels of
organization and experience for procurement of large and complex contracts, and delays on completion of contracts due
to inadequate contract management capacity. To mitigate the Fiduciary risks, the project will apply World Bank
procurement and FM regulations, and enhanced oversight, including quarterly IFRs and annual audits, will be put in place.
The financial management assessment and the PPSD prepared for the project identified additional mitigation measures,
for FM and procurement risks, respectively. Mitigation measures include: (i) the strengthening of the FM and
                                                                                                                  Page 19
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Procurement capacity of the implementing institutions through training and contracting of specialized technical
assistance as required with skills and qualifications acceptable to the Bank; and (ii) the development and adoption of a
PIM with strong FM and procurement procedures. Nevertheless, the residual fiduciary risk is considered Substantial.
75.     Environmental and social risks are rated as Substantial, reflecting potential impacts from civil works and the
complex social context. Environmentally, temporary impacts during constructions such as erosion, waste disposal, and
OHS hazards—may occur, particularly in areas near sensitive ecosystems and in regions with weak institutional capacity.
Socially, risks include land acquisition, temporary economic displacement in dense urban areas, affordability concerns
linked to tariff reforms, and heightened SEA/SH risks due to labor influx and existing vulnerabilities. These will be
mitigated through ESF-compliant instruments, including ESIAs, SEP, SEA/SH Action Plan, GRM, and institutional capacity-
building across all implementing agencies.




                                                                                                                Page 20
       The World Bank
       Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                      Period 1                    Period 2              Period 3   Period 4        Closing Period
   Increased access to water supply services
   People provided with at least basic water (Number of people) CRI
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                    Dec/2027              Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
   0                             9,400                       70,500                150,400    209,150         282,000
     ➢People provided with at least basic water - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                    Dec/2027              Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
   0                             4,888                       36,660                78,208     108,758         146,640
     ➢People provided with at least basic water - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                    Dec/2027              Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
   0                             6,298                       47,235                100,768    140,131         188,940
   People benefiting from improved water services (Number of people)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                    Dec/2027              Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
   0                             0                           0                     63,450     300,800         473,000
     ➢People benefiting from improved water services - Female (Number of people)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                    Dec/2027              Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
   0                             0                           0                     32,994     156,416         245,960
     ➢People benefiting from improved water services - Youth (Number of people)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                    Dec/2027              Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
   0                             0                           0                     45,512     201,536         316,910
   Improve the efficiency of urban water supply services
   Operating cost recovery ratio (Percentage)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                    Dec/2027              Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
   0.87                          0.89                        0.94                  0.95       1.10            1.15
     ➢Operating cost recovery ratio in Greater Maputo (Percentage)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                    Dec/2027              Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030



                                                                                                                               Page 21
       The World Bank
       Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                                                   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


   0.97                         0.98                          0.99                       1.00                         1.10                           1.15
     ➢Operating cost recovery ratio in Southern Region (Percentage)
   Mar/2025                     Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                   Dec/2028                     Dec/2029                       Dec/2030
   0.76                         0.80                          0.88                       0.90                         1.10                           1.15


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                      Period 1                      Period 2                     Period 3                      Period 4                   Closing Period
   C1: Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services
   Water quality and climate‐informed water allocation shared with water users (Yes/No)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                     Dec/2028                      Dec/2029                   Dec/2030
   No                            No                            Yes                          Yes                           Yes                        Yes
   Additional water production contributing to increase climate resilience of services (m3/day) (Number)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                     Oct/2028                      Dec/2029                   Dec/2030
   0                             0                             0                            40,000                        40,000                     40,000
   Cumulative number of new household connections supported by the project that remains active (Number)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                     Dec/2028                      Dec/2029                   Dec/2030
   0                             2,000                         15,000                       32,000                        44,500                     60,000
     ➢Cumulative number of new low-income household connections that remains active (Number)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                     Dec/2028                      Dec/2029                   Dec/2030
   0                             0                             10,000                       20,000                        30,000                     40,000
   Cumulative number of existing household connections benefiting from improved services supported by the project (Number)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                     Dec/2028                      Dec/2029                   Dec/2030
   0                             0                             0                            13,500                        64,000                     100,650
     ➢Cumulative number of existing household connections benefiting from improved services provided by public utilities (Number)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                     Dec/2028                      Dec/2029                   Dec/2030
   0                             0                             0                            10,000                        50,000                     80,650
     ➢Cumulative number of existing household connections benefiting from improved services provided by private water providers (Number of people)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                     Dec/2028                      Dec/2029                   Dec/2030
   0                             0                             0                            3,500                         14,000                     20,000
   C2: Improvement of performance and efficiency of services
   Recovered water from NRW reduction interventions (m3/day) (Number)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                     Dec/2028                      Dec/2029                   Dec/2030




                                                                                                                                                                      Page 22
    The World Bank
    Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


0                               0                        4,000                        9,000      18,000          28,000
  ➢Recovered water from NRW reduction interventions in Greater Maputo (m3/day) (Number)
Mar/2025                        Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                     Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
0                               0                        4,000                        9,000      18,000          20,000
  ➢Recovered of water from NRW reduction intervention in Southern Region (m3/day) (Number)
Mar/2025                        Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                     Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
0                               0                        1,000                        3,000      5,000           8,000
Annual PIAP targets for the Greater Maputo reached (Yes/No) PBC
Mar/2025                        Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                     Dec/2027   Dec/2028        Dec/2029
No                              Yes                      Yes                          Yes        Yes             Yes
Annual PIAP targets for the Southern Region reached (Yes/No) PBC
Mar/2025                        Dec/2025                 Dec/2027                     Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
No                              Yes                      Yes                          Yes        Yes             Yes
Collection bill ratio (Percentage)
Mar/2025                        Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                     Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
80                              80                       83                           86         89              93
  ➢Collection bill ratio in Greater Maputo (Percentage)
Mar/2025                        Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                     Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
71                              71                       75                           80         85              90
  ➢Collection bill ratio in Southern Region (Percentage)
Mar/2025                        Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                     Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
89                              89                       91                           92         93              95
Energy consumption (kW per cubic meter of water distributed) (Number)
Mar/2025                        Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                     Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
0.57                            53                       52                           51         50              0.49
  ➢Energy consumption in Greater Maputo (kW per cubic meter of water distributed) (Number)
Mar/2025                        Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                     Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
0.59                            0.59                     0.59                         0.58       0.56            0.55
  ➢Energy consumption in Southern Region (kW per cubic meter of water distributed) (Number)
Mar/2025                        Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                     Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
0.54                            0.46                     0.45                         0.44       0.44            0.43
Average hours of water supply (Hours)
Mar/2025                        Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                     Dec/2028   Dec/2029        Dec/2030
15.60                           16                       16                           16         18              19


                                                                                                                                  Page 23
       The World Bank
       Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                                                        PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


     ➢Average hours of water supply in the Greater Maputo (Hours)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                       Dec/2028                     Dec/2029                  Dec/2030
   15                            16                            16                             16                           18                        20
     ➢Average hours of water supply in Southern Region (Hours) (Hours)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                       Dec/2028                     Dec/2029                  Dec/2030
   13                            16                            16                             16                           18                        18
   Institutions with a robust complaints and feedback mechanism in place and operational (Number)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                       Dec/2028                     Dec/2029                  Dec/2030
   1                             2                             3                              4                            5                         5
   C3: Water sector development support
   Policies approved and published contributing to improve the enabling environment for PSP (Number)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                       Dec/2028                     Dec/2029                  Dec/2030
   0                             1                             2                              2                            2                         2
   Contract signed with a private entity to support on performance improvement of operations (Yes/No)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                       Dec/2028                     Dec/2029                  Dec/2030
   No                            No                            Yes                            Yes                          Yes                       Yes
   Number of PWP's systems licensed under the new policy (Number)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                       Dec/2028                     Dec/2029                  Dec/2030
   0                             50                            105                            235                          355                       400
   Annual resolution on tariff review that secures the sustainability of operations issued and services performance report published (Yes/No) PBC
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                       Dec/2028                     Dec/2029                  Dec/2030
   No                            Yes                           Yes                            Yes                          Yes                       Yes
   Women in managerial position (Percentage)
   Mar/2025                      Dec/2026                      Dec/2027                       Dec/2028                     Dec/2029                  Dec/2030
   26                            27                            29                             31                           32                        32
   C4: Project management support
   C5: Contingent Emergency Response


Performance-based Conditions (PBC)

   Period                                                                                     Period Definition
   Period 1                                                                                   2025
   Period 2                                                                                   2026



                                                                                                                                                                      Page 24
    The World Bank
    Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                                                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Period 3                                                                                   2027
Period 4                                                                                   2028
Period 5                                                                                   2029

Baseline                       Period 1                      Period 2                      Period 3                       Period 4               Period 5
1:Annual PIAP targets for the Greater Maputo reached (Yes/No )
No                             Yes                           Yes                           Yes                            Yes                    Yes
0.00                           2,400,000.00                  2,400,000.00                  2,400,000.00                   2,400,000.00           2,400,000.00
PBC allocation                                               12,000,000.00                 As a % of Total PBC Allocation                        48.98%
2:Annual PIAP targets for the Southern Region reached (Yes/No )
No                             Yes                           Yes                           Yes                            Yes                    Yes
0.00                           2,100,000.00                  2,100,000.00                  2,100,000.00                   2,100,000.00           2,100,000.00
PBC allocation                                               10,500,000.00                 As a % of Total PBC Allocation                        42.86%
3:Annual resolution on tariff review that secures the sustainability of operations issued and services performance report published (Yes/No )
No                             Yes                           Yes                           Yes                            Yes                    Yes
0.00                           400,000.00                    400,000.00                    400,000.00                     400,000.00             400,000.00
PBC allocation                                               2,000,000.00                  As a % of Total PBC Allocation                        8.16%




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 25
           The World Bank
           Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



               Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
  PDO: Increased access to improved water supply services
  People provided with at least basic water (Number of people) CRI
                                      Number of people who will gain access to basic water supply by the construction of new
  Description
                                      household connections
  Frequency                           Annual
  Data source                         Utilities performance reports and commercial softwares
  Methodology for Data Collection     To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
  Responsibility for Data Collection  FIPAG
  People benefiting from improved water services (Number of people)
                                      Number of people already connected who will gain access to improved water supply services that
  Description
                                      comply with key performance indicators (hours of services, water quality)
  Frequency                           Annual
  Data source                         Utilities performance reports and commercial softwares
  Methodology for Data Collection     To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
  Responsibility for Data Collection  FIPAG
  PDO: Improve the efficiency of urban water supply services
  Operating cost recovery ratio
  Description                         Operating revenues collected divided by operating costs
  Frequency                           Annual
  Data source                         Utilities annual financial audit reports and regulator’s report
  Methodology for Data Collection     To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
  Responsibility for Data Collection  FIPAG


 Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
 C1: Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services
 Water quality and climate‐informed water allocation shared with water users (Yes/No)
Description                                Water quality and climate‐informed water allocation shared with water users
Frequency                                  Annual
Data source                                ARA-Sul’s webpage and sharing reports
Methodology for Data Collection            Access ARA-Sul’s public webpage and check
Responsibility for Data Collection         ARA-Sul
Additional water production contributing to increase climate resilience of services (Cubic meters/year)
                                          Additional water production mobilized from new water sources that will contribute to
Description
                                          diversify the matrix of sources therefore contributing to increase climate resilience of services
Frequency                                 Annual
Data source                               Project implementation reports
Methodology for Data Collection           To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
Responsibility for Data Collection        FIPAG
Cumulative number of new household connections supported by the project that remains active (Number)
                                          Number of new household connections constructed with project funds that remain connected
Description
                                          in reporting year
Frequency                                 Annual
Data source                               Utility reports and data from commercial softwares
Methodology for Data Collection           To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
Responsibility for Data Collection        FIPAG
Cumulative number of existing household connections benefiting from improved services supported by the project (Number)



                                                                                                                                              Page 26
          The World Bank
          Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 C1: Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services
                                          Household connections that will gain access to improved water supply from ROCs and PWPs
Description
                                          as a results of project investments
Frequency                                 Annual
Data source                               Project reports, ROC’s reports
Methodology for Data Collection           To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
Responsibility for Data Collection        FIPAG and DNAAS

  C2: Improvement of performance and efficiency of services
 Recovered water from NRW reduction interventions (Cubic Meter(m3))
                                          Volume of water “lost” (difference between water supplied and water sold) by AdRMM and
 Description
                                          AdRS retrieved after implementation of a NRW program, expressed in m3/day.
 Frequency                                Annual
 Data source                              PBC report, ROCs’ reports
 Methodology for Data Collection          To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
 Responsibility for Data Collection       FIPAG and ROCs
 Annual PIAP targets for the Greater Maputo reached (Yes/No) PBC
                                          A PIAP is developed and approved by FIPAG and satisfactory for the Association, aiming to
 Description
                                          reduce NRW and improve energy and commercial efficiencies for AdRMM.
 Frequency                                Annual
 Data source                              Verification Report
 Methodology for Data Collection          Specified in the Verification Protocol
 Responsibility for Data Collection       FIPAG
 Annual PIAP targets for the Southern Region reached (Yes/No) PBC
                                          A PIAP is developed and approved by FIPAG and satisfactory for the Association, aiming to
 Description
                                          reduce NRW and improve energy and commercial efficiencies for AdRS.
 Frequency                                Annual
 Data source                              Verification Report
 Methodology for Data Collection          Specified in the Verification Protocol
 Responsibility for Data Collection       FIPAG
 Collection bill ratio (Percentage)
 Description                               Percentage of amount of water bills collected / amount of water bills invoiced
 Frequency                                Annual
 Data source                              ROCs’ and Regulator’s performance reports
 Methodology for Data Collection          To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
 Responsibility for Data Collection       FIPAG and ROCs
 Energy consumption (kW per cubic meter of water distributed) (Number)
 Description                              Ratio between quantity of energy (kW) and volume (m3) of water distributed
 Frequency                                Annual
 Data source                              ROCs’ and Regulator’s performance reports
 Methodology for Data Collection          To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
 Responsibility for Data Collection       FIPAG and ROCs
 Average hours of water supply (Hours)
 Description                              Average of daily hours of water supply along the year
 Frequency                                Annual
 Data source                              ROCs’ and Regulator’s performance reports
 Methodology for Data Collection          To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
 Responsibility for Data Collection       FIPAG and ROCs




                                                                                                                                      Page 27
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


C3: Water sector development support
Policies approved and published contributing to improve the enabling environment for PSP (Number)
                                        Decrees, policies and regulations clarifying procedures for licensing of private entities in water and
Description
                                        sanitation, and securing their investment.
Frequency                               Annual
Data source                             Project biannually reports
Methodology for Data Collection         Check publication of decrees and resolutions in the Rpublic’s Gazette
Responsibility for Data Collection      DNAAS
Contract signed with a private entity to support performance improvement of operations (Yes/No)
                                        For at least one ROC, a contract is signed with a private entity to support on performance improvement
Description
                                        of operations
Frequency                               Annual
Data source                             Project biannually reports
Methodology for Data Collection         Contract signed and validated by the Tribunal Administrative
Responsibility for Data Collection      FIPAG
Number of PWP's systems licensed under the new policy (Number)
Description                             This indicator will reflect the number of PWP licensed under the new policy and technical standards.
Frequency                               Annual
Data source                             Project biannually reports
Methodology for Data Collection         To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
Responsibility for Data Collection      DNAAS
Annual resolution on tariff review that secures the sustainability of operations issued and services performance report published (Yes/No) PBC
                                        A tariff review is conducted annually and adopted by AURA to secure the sustainability of operations and
Description
                                        services performance report published
Frequency                               Annual
Data source                             AURA’s website and Republic’s Gazette
Methodology for Data Collection         Specified in the Verification Protocol
Responsibility for Data Collection      DNAAS and AURA
Women in managerial position (Percentage)
Description                             Women in managerial position at AdRMM, AdRS and ARA-Sul
Frequency                               Annual
Data source                             Project biannually reports
Methodology for Data Collection         To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
Responsibility for Data Collection      FIPAG and DNAAS
Institutions with robust complaints and feedback mechanism in place and operational (Number)
                                        Institutions (FIPAG, AURA, ARA-Sul, AdRMM and AdRS) having in place an operational robust complaints
Description
                                        and feedback mechanism.
Frequency                               Annual
Data source                             Project biannually reports
Methodology for Data Collection         To be detailed in the Project Operations Manual




                                                                                                                                          Page 28
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                     Verification Protocol: Performance Based Conditions
PBC1: Improved performance of water supply services in the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area
                       The PIAP will define the weigths of the following three performance improvement indicators: NRW reduction, energy
                       efficiency, collection ratio. Other performance improvement indicators can also be considered. The amount entitled for
Formula                the PIAP for each year will be multiplied by a factor of the transferred amount of the sum of the sanitation tariff and
                       regulatory fee through the water bill divided by the sum of the collected sanitation tariff and regulatory fee for the
                       previous year up to the limit of one.
                       The PIAP will define the weigths of the following three performance improvement indicators: NRW reduction, energy
                       efficiency, collection ratio. Other performance improvement indicators can also be considered. The amount entitled for
Description            the PIAP for each year will be multiplied by a factor of the transferred amount of the sum of the sanitation tariff and
                       regulatory fee through the water bill divided by the sum of the collected sanitation tariff and regulatory fee for the
                       previous year up to the limit of one.
Data source/ Agency    AdRMM
Verification Entity    Independent Verification Agent
                       For the first year the verification entity will verify that FIPAG has prepared the PIAP including the minimum content
                       defined in the Program documents and the annual targets for each action area. For the following years the verification
Procedure
                       entity will verify the results achieved for each action area from appropriate records (Commercial database, macro-
                       metering records, energy bills, etc.).
PBC2: Improved performance of water supply services in the Southern Region
                         The PIAP will define the weigths of the following three performance improvement indicators: NRW reduction, energy
                         efficiency, collection ratio. Other performance improvement indicators can also be considered. The amount entitled for
Formula                  the PIAP for each year will be multiplied by a factor of the transferred amount of the sum of the collected sanitation
                         tariff and regulatory fee through the water bill divided by the sum of the collected sanitation tariff and regulatory fee for
                         the previous year.
                         DLI 6.2 monitors the development, adoption and implementation of a performance improvement action plan (PIAP)
                         aiming to reduce NRW and improve energy and commercial efficiencies for the Southern Region. The plan shall also
Description              include a gender equality action plan. For the first year FIPAG shall prepare and adopt the PIAP including the minimum
                         content defined in the Program documents and the annual targets for each action area. For the following years FIPAG
                         shall achieve at least 75% of the results set for each action area.
Data source/ Agency      AdRS
Verification Entity      Independent Verification Agent
                         For the first year the verification entity will verify that FIPAG has prepared the PIAP including the minimum content
                         defined in the Program documents and the annual targets for each action area. For the following years the verification
Procedure
                         entity will verify the results achieved for each action area from appropriate records (Commercial database, macro-
                         metering records, energy bills, etc.).
PBC3: Annual resolution on tariff review that secures the sustainability of operations issued and services performance report published
Formula                  Not applicable
                         Monitors the implementation of the tariff review process to reinstate the economic and financial equilibrium of water
                         supply operations and the access to information regarding performance of the water service providers for the public.
Description
                         The result expected for this DLI is that every year AURA makes a decision on tariff review and publishes it in the Republic
                         Gazette.
Data source/ Agency      AURA
Verification Entity      Independent Verification Agent
                         The verification entity will verify the resolutions approved by AURA regarding the annual tariff review including the
                         compliance of proposed tariff adjustments with the approved tariff model and the annual tariff review mechanism
Procedure
                         (Decree 41/2021) and its publication in the republics gazette and the publication of the WSS service performance report
                         in the regulator’s website and benchmarking platform (AURAnet).




                                                                                                                                              Page 29
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                        PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                                ANNEX 2: PROJECT COSTAB

                                                                                                                       Cost
 ID                                                       Activity
                                                                                                                      (MUSD)
        Component 1 - Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services
                                                                                                                        72.10
 1.A    Reducing climate hazards impacting water supply infrastructure and services                                      2.85
        Strengthening of climate informed water planning and allocation, including extension of telemetric networks
1.A.1                                                                                                                    1.50
        and financing of climate informed water allocation models
1.A.2   Enhancement of water quality through improved watershed management and groundwater monitoring                    1.35
  1.B   Expansion of access to climate-resilient water supply services                                                  49.60
        Diversification of water sources supply the Greater Maputo through the investment on the second phase of
1.B.1                                                                                                                   28.00
        the Sabie WTP and climate resilient bridge crossing for the Incomati river
        Construction of 7 small water supply systems along the Corumana-Machava transmission main to service
1.B.2                                                                                                                    4.50
        low-income populations
1.B.3   Supervision of works                                                                                             3.00
1.B.4   Completion of the Tete water supply systems works (distribution center and network)                             13.20
  1.C   Output-based payments (OBP) for low-income household connections to climate-resilient services                   6.50
1.C.1   Implementation of a grants program for 40,000 new connections                                                    5.60
1.C.2   Independent Verification Agent for the OBP                                                                       0.90
  1.D   Improvement of the quality of services provided by PWPs                                                          7.65
        Matching grants for upgrade of private water supply systems to improve their resilience and secure
1.D.1                                                                                                                    7.50
        compliance with health and quality standards
1.D.2   Design and supervision of the implementation of the matching grant                                               0.15
  1.E   Access to safely managed sanitation services                                                                     5.50
1.E.1   Completion of the Tete's Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant (FSTP) works and supervision                               4.00
1.E.2   Strengthening of fecal sludge management practices in urban areas                                                1.50
        Component 2 - Improvement of performance and efficiency of services                                             49.35
  2.A   Implementation of the Performance Improvement Action Plan (PIAP) for the GMMA
2.A.1   NRW reduction investments led by the utility
2.A.2   Energy efficiency
2.A.3   Strengthen billing and collection                                                                               12.00
2.A.4   Training and capacity building
2.A.5   Women empowerment program
2.A.6   Improving utility’s governance, accountability and communication
  2.B   Implementation of the PIAP for the Southern Region service area
2.B.1   NRW reduction investments led by the utility
2.B.2   Energy efficiency
2.B.3   Strengthen billing and collection                                                                               10.50
2.B.4   Training and capacity building
2.B.5   Women empowerment program
2.B.6   Improving utility’s governance, accountability and communication
  2.C   Performance-based contract (PBCt) for non-revenue water reduction in AdRMM and AdRS                             25.00
2.C.1   PBC for NRW reduction in the GMMA (Matola Rio, Boane, Belo-Horizonte e Machava)                                 20.00
2.C.2   PBC/Co-management contract for NRW reduction in the Southern Region                                              4.50
2.C.3   PBC supervision and implementation support                                                                       0.50
  2.D   Revolving fund for a prepaid meter program                                                                       1.85
2.D.1   Design of the financing and repayment mechanism                                                                  0.21


                                                                                                                         Page 30
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)                                        PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                                                                                                      Cost
 ID                                                       Activity
                                                                                                                     (MUSD)
2.D.2   Financing of a prepaid meter scale up program                                                                   1.64
        Component 3 - Water sector development support                                                                 14.26
  3.A   Improving the enabling environment for Private Sector Participation                                             0.50
  3.B   Strengthen the regulatory role                                                                                  2.00
3.B.1   Strategic communication of the regulatory role                                                                  0.30
3.B.2   Operationalization of the Regulators Complaints Platform                                                        0.30
3.B.3   Capacity and willingness to pay study                                                                           0.30
3.B.4   Technical assistance on Economic Regulation and PPP contract models                                             0.40
3.B.5   Capacity Development Program focused on core regulatory functions                                               0.40
3.B.6   Strengthening of sector governance practices                                                                    0.30
  3.C   Strengthen ARA-Sul capacity to manage water resources                                                           3.36
3.C.1   Construction and equipping of ARA-Sul's operational office and water quality laboratory                         2.20
3.C.2   Strengthening of ARA's financial sustainability and revenue collection                                          0.24
3.C.3   Institutional Development Support to ARA-Sul                                                                    0.25
3.C.4   Capacity building and young water professionals and gender-balanced talent recruitment program                  0.52
3.C.5   Implementation of the Gender Strategy                                                                           0.15
  3.D   Institutional development support for FIPAG                                                                     4.95
3.D.1   Implementation of the ICT and digitalization plan for FIPAG and ROCs                                            0.80
3.D.2   Management contracts/Competitive recruitment for ROCs                                                           2.30
3.D.3   Asset management and condition survey                                                                           1.00
3.D.4   Capacity building plan                                                                                          0.70
3.D.5   Development of a protocol for climate proofing of water supply infrastructure                                   0.15
  3.E   Preparatory studies for the next generation of WSS investments                                                  3.45
3.E.1   Feasibility study, design and draft of bidding documents for Xai-Xai, Chokwe, Chibuto, I’bane e Maxixe WSS      2.00
3.E.2   Feasibility study, design and draft of bidding documents for Angoche e Ilha de Moçambique WSS                   1.00
3.E.3   PIAPS for AdRC, AdRN, AdRS, AdRMM                                                                               0.45
    4   Component 4 - Project Management Support                                                                        7.29
  4.A   Project Management Support for FIPAG                                                                            5.20
4.A.1   Incremental costs for project implementation                                                                    0.40
4.A.2   Incremental costs for OBP implementation                                                                        0.50
4.A.3   Project image and communication                                                                                 0.20
4.A.4   Preparation of key project documents (PPSD, ESF, POM)                                                           0.30
4.A.5   Independent Verification Agent                                                                                  0.20
4.A.6   Technical Assistances (Procurement, Social, Environmental, Comms., and Business Development)                    1.30
4.A.7   Support for Environmental and Social Compliance                                                                 2.30
  4.B   Project management support for DNAAS                                                                            2.09
4.B.1   Incremental costs for project implementation                                                                    0.60
4.B.2   Technical Assistances (Procurement, WS, FM, Social and Environmental)                                           0.80
4.B.3   Incremental project costs for Regulator’s project activities                                                    0.19
4.B.4   Incremental project costs for ARA-Sul's project activities                                                      0.50
        TOTAL                                                                                                         143.00




                                                                                                                        Page 31
