Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Kambarata-1 HPP: Sustainable and Transformational Energy Program (P509251)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Jan-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01199




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Kambarata-1 HPP: Sustainable and Transformational Energy Program (P509251)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
Kyrgyz Republic,               P509251                     Kambarata-1 HPP: Sustainable and Transformational
Uzbekistan                                                 Energy Program
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date     Practice Area (Lead)
EUROPE AND CENTRAL             21-Apr-2025                 26-Sep-2025                 Energy & Extractives
ASIA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Republic of Uzbekistan,     Ministry of Energy
Financing (IPF)                Kyrgyz Republic

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To strengthen regional energy-water cooperation in Central Asia.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                    500.00

  Total Financing                                                                                         500.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                            500.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                            500.00
      IDA Credit                                                                                          500.00



                                                                                                                Page 1
       The World Bank
       Kambarata-1 HPP: Sustainable and Transformational Energy Program (P509251)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                     Concept Review Decision
High                                                             The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1.     The Kambarata-1 Hydropower Plant (HPP) is a transformational greenfield clean energy project with substantial
domestic and regional benefits aimed at bolstering energy security, accelerating the clean energy transition, improving
water management and strengthening the regional cooperation in Central Asia. It will be in the upstream reach of the
Naryn River in the Kyrgyz Republic (KR) with design capacity of 1,860 MW (~50percent of the current installed capacity in
the country), a 256-meter-high dam, 5.4 billion cubic meter reservoir, and 5,600 GWh annual generation. The use of
multipurpose dam infrastructure, such as Kambarata-1 HPP, will increasingly play an important role in Central Asia towards
improved water management, climate resilience and carbon-neutral energy production.
2.      The Kambarata-1 HPP, as a national priority project, will help address the seasonal energy deficit, thereby
supporting economic growth. The Kambarata-1 HPP will help meet the rising energy demand and alleviate growing winter
energy shortages in KR—estimated at 20 percent of total domestic annual demand—which have constrained the country's
growth potential over the years. This situation has led to the KR increasing its winter energy imports dependency in recent
years, putting country’s energy security at risk. The situation is further exacerbated by neighboring countries also
experiencing energy shortages during the winter period, leaving the KR to seek emergency energy imports at high prices.
The project is expected to enhance energy security and reliability, thereby boosting economic growth and improving
population welfare in the country and region.
3.       The Kambarata-1 HPP project forms part of the least-cost regional solution to expand clean energy resources in
the Kyrgyz Republic and Central Asia region. The Kambarata-1 HPP, alongside the Rogun HPP, forms a critical part of the
least-cost pathway for decarbonization in the region. Currently, Central Asia’s energy sector relies heavily on fossil fuels,
with about 70 percent of electricity generated from hydrocarbons. The region's energy demand is expected to grow by 40
percent by 2030 and double by 2050, necessitating substantial increases in generation capacity. Central Asia has significant
untapped hydropower resources, with only 13percent of Kyrgyz Republic’s and less than 10percent of Tajikistan’s potential
utilized. Kambarata-1 HPP and Rogun HPP would play a key role in meeting rising energy demand, reducing transition
costs, and providing flexible balancing services for solar and wind expansion in the region. The Kyrgyzstan energy sector
Master Plan also confirmed Kambarata-1 as a top priority. The project is also expected to boost regional energy
cooperation and support the development of a Central Asian electricity market through the World Bank's planned REMIT
program (P181214), aiming to establish regional market principles and short-term trading by 2035.
4.       The Kambarata-1 HPP project has emerged as a pivotal regional initiative in advancing regional cooperation in
Central Asia. Recognizing the above-mentioned energy-water benefits, in June 2024, the Kyrgyz Republic, Uzbekistan, and
Kazakhstan entered into an agreement to jointly develop, finance, and operate the Kambarata-1 HPP project under a joint
public financing approach, marking a groundbreaking initiative in regional cooperation on the energy-water agenda in

                                                                                                                        Page 2
        The World Bank
        Kambarata-1 HPP: Sustainable and Transformational Energy Program (P509251)


Central Asia. Additionally, an intergovernmental working group has been established to jointly coordinate the preparation
of the project with regular meetings to review progress, address rising issues, and agree on immediate next steps and
actions. The joint development presents several advantages, including reducing the burden on the Kyrgyz Republic’s fiscal
position; raising of financing under better sovereign credit ratings of Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan, thereby lowering costs;
ensuring commercial viability through strong export PPAs; and facilitating regional energy and water dialogue.
5.       Given the project’s large scale (approximately 30 percent of GDP), its regional significance, the GoKR has
requested the World Bank to serve as the lead arranger in supporting the design and implementation of the Kambarata-
1 HPP project. In response to the Government request, the World Bank is providing comprehensive support to the
development of Kamabarata-1 HPP project through the Technical Assistance for Kambarata-1 Hydropower Plant Project
(Kambarata-1 TA project, P181086) with total financing of US$18.6 million (US$14 million IDA, US$2 million ESMAP grant,
US$2.6 CAWEP grant) with the following components: (i) updating the 2014 feasibility study to verify the technical
feasibility and economic viability; (ii) preparation of environmental and social documents; (iii) developing a sustainable
financing plan and commercial framework; and (iv) project implementation support and capacity building. The proposed
Project enables the World Bank to provide comprehensive support and technical oversight during the project
development, contracts procurement, detailed design and early works, ensuring bankability and sustainability, in
collaboration with development partners. There is strong interest among development partners to co-finance the
Kambarata-1 HPP project, and the Kambarata-1 HPP Donor Coordination Committee was established in June 2024,
comprising major international financial institutions1.
6.       The KR has demonstrated strong economic performance over the past years with growth averaging at 6.9
percent in 2021-23, primarily driven by exports, consumption and investments. GDP growth is projected at 5.8 percent
in 2024 and around 4.5 percent in the medium-term. The KR’s state budget recorded a surplus of 1.2 percent of GDP in
2023 and above 6 percent of GDP in H1, 2024. The current account deficit was at 48.2 percent of GDP in 2023, that is
projected to further decline to 10.8 percent of GDP in 2024 and 8.2 percent by 2026. In 2023, the international poverty
rate measured at US$3.65/day dropped to 9.7 percent, down from 11.3 percent in 2022, mainly driven by inflation
stabilization, labor earnings, and robust economic growth. Poverty reduction is expected to continue, driven by lower
inflation and expanding social protection programs. Risks to the medium-term outlook mainly arise from the geopolitical
situation and any marked deterioration in the Russian economy would affect remittances and export demand.


 Sectoral and Institutional Context
7.     The country has been facing a growing energy deficit and insufficient generation, especially during winter.
Hydropower dominates the electricity mix in the country, constituting 78 percent of the total installed capacity and 86
percent of electricity generation in 2023. Most of the hydroelectric system is operated using water released from the
Toktogul reservoir, the largest reservoir in Central Asia with 19.5 billion cubic meter capacity. Thermal generators include
two combined heat and power plants, fueled primarily by coal with gas as backup.
8.      Electricity demand has increased by around 70 percent since 2010 (on average 4 percent per annum), mainly
driven by economic growth and improvements in national welfare. Meanwhile, no new major power plants were
constructed during this time. Electricity demand in winter is 2-3 times higher than in summer, primarily due to widespread
use of electricity for heating, with residential consumption making up about 55percent of total demand. Consequently,
domestic energy supply has not been able to meet the country’s growing demand, leading to around 20percent energy


1 ACG: Arab Coordination Group, ADB: Asian Development Bank, AIIB: Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, EU: European Union, EIB: European

Investment Bank, EBRD: European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, IsDB: Islamic Development Bank, FCDO: Foreign Commonwealth and
Development Office, OPEC Fund: Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries Fund, USAID: United States Agency for International
Development

                                                                                                                                     Page 3
        The World Bank
        Kambarata-1 HPP: Sustainable and Transformational Energy Program (P509251)


deficit during winter, resorting to increased import of fossil fuels and electricity. Meanwhile, the country's vast energy
potential remains largely untapped, with only 13 percent of its hydro potential utilized, and renewable energy resources
unexploited.


 Relationship to CPF
9.      The proposed Kambarata-1 HPP Sustainable and Transformational Energy Program (K1-STEP) supports the
GoKR and Central Asia countries to sustain strong economic growth, enhance energy security and advance the clean
energy transition. It is central to the World Bank Group’s engagement in Central Asia, which prioritizes the energy, water
and climate agenda as well as regional connectivity as key pillars of support. The K1-STEP Program is well-aligned with
“High-level Outcome 2 (HLO2): Improved Access to Sustainably Managed Natural Resources” of Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for the KR in FY24-FY282. The World Bank’s role is also central in collaborating with development partners
on reform agenda, coordinating reform supports and mobilizing a sustainable financing package for the K1-STEP Program.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
10.     The program development objective (PrDO) is to increase supply of clean hydroelectricity and strengthen regional
energy-water cooperation in the Kyrgyz Republic and Central Asia region.
11.       The PDO for Phase 1 of K1-STEP Program is to strengthen regional energy-water cooperation in Central Asia.

  Key Results (From PCN)
12.    The challenges that the program intends to address, project components, outputs, intermediary and long-term
outcomes are summarized in Figure 1 below.
                                                        Figure 1. Program Results Chain




2 The CPF for the Kyrgyz Republic for the period FY24-FY28 prioritizes the World Bank support in energy, water and agriculture sectors, and identifies

the Kambarata-1 project as a transformational project for the county and region (Report No. 182689-KG; October 31, 2023).

                                                                                                                                                 Page 4
       The World Bank
       Kambarata-1 HPP: Sustainable and Transformational Energy Program (P509251)


 D. Concept Description
13.      Structuring of MPA Phases. The K1-STEP Program is structured in three phases based on the project schedule, to
be further updated, and assumes that the World Bank would provide financing to the three countries. Additionally, the
proposed phasing is also justified given that participating countries have different internal government processes. The
phasing will be further refined as the FS is finalized including the technical design, the procurement strategy and definition
of work packages, the concept of early generation, and financing timing also considering macro-fiscal sustainability. The
activities supported under each phase are as follows:
    (a) Phase 1 includes achieving: completion of site preparation activities and early works, preparation of detailed
         project design, implementation of project management and supervision, establishment and operationalization of
         a regional joint venture (project company), E&S management, and design and implementation of
         hydrometeorological works.
    (b) Phase 2-3 include achieving: all the remaining main works according to construction schedule, as well as
         completing project management and supervision, E&S management, and hydro meteorological activities.
14.      The Program is designed in three phases with indicative total funding envelope of US$1,500 million, including the
Phase 1 – US$500 million, from the World Bank to the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Uzbekistan, and the Republic of
Kazakhstan.
15.      Phase 1 of the K1-STEP Program will consist of the following components. The division of construction activities
between the phases of the MPA will be further refined as the preparation progresses.
16. Component 1: Early works. This component will finance the early works such as diversion tunnels, dam, powerhouse
and substation pre-excavation, site installation.
17. Component 2. Project design, management and supervision. This component will finance the PMC, project
implementation support, and the operationalization of the Kambarata-1 Regional JV.
    (a) Subcomponent 1. Operationalization of the Kambarata-1 Regional project company.
    (b) Subcomponent 2. Project Management Consultancy (PMC).
    (c) Subcomponent 3. Project implementation support.
    (d) Subcomponent 4. Owner’s cost.
18. Component 3. Implementation of social and environmental management plans. This component will finance the
implementation and monitoring of E&S instruments including ESMP, Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Livelihood
Restoration Plan (LRP) requirements. This component will also support the implementation of a comprehensive benefit
sharing plan in support of possible affected communities and national social programs.
19. Component 4. Water management institutional capacity and regional coordination support. This component will
finance a set of hydro meteorological instrumentation and consultancy services required for the Kambarata-1 HPP project,
including key monitoring investments in the upper Naryn river basin to support the operation of Kambarata-1 HPP and
mitigate future climate risks, and improve the water management institutional foundations within the Kambarata-1 HPP
project and broader regional framework.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                      Triggered?


                                                                                                                         Page 5
       The World Bank
       Kambarata-1 HPP: Sustainable and Transformational Energy Program (P509251)



 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



Given the scale and nature of large Hydropower Projects with storage reservoirs, significant environmental and social
issues would need to be addressed during the project cycle – from planning, through design, implementation, and
operation. Environmental impacts include permanent inundation of the reservoir area, and landscape changes, alteration
of the Naryn River's flow, water quality, and hydromorphology, and changes in terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity.
Construction will involve extensive civil works, including access roads, bridges, and transmission infrastructure, leading to
long-term adverse impacts on the biophysical environment. Air and noise pollution, vibration from blasting, and waste
disposal issues are anticipated. Occupational as well as community health and safety risks will be large due to the large
workforce, substantial material and heavy equipment movement, and provision of necessary security measures.
Therefore, environmental risk is rated as High based on the current understanding of the scale of the project’s impacts
and the Borrower's familiarity with and capacity for implementation of ESF requirements. The social risk rating is
Substantial. This rating would be reassessed before the Bank’s appraisal. Key social risks include limited stakeholder
engagement, and the need for an effective grievance mechanism. The project will bring a significant labor influx, peaking
at 3,000 workers, which would require special attention to labor management, community health and safety, gender-
based violence, and security.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Maksudjon Safarov
   Senior Energy Specialist

   Aleix Serrat Capdevila
   Senior Water Resources Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Republic of Uzbekistan

  Kyrgyz Republic

 Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                                        Page 6
     The World Bank
     Kambarata-1 HPP: Sustainable and Transformational Energy Program (P509251)


 Ministry of Energy
 Nurlan Sadykov
 Deputy Minister
 minenergo@mail.gov.kg

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Maksudjon Safarov, Aleix Serrat Capdevila

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Stephanie Gil                          09-Dec-2024

Country Director:                      Tolkun Jukusheva                       03-Jan-2025




                                                                                            Page 7
