Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Mozambique Urban Water Security Project(P509890)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Apr-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01256




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Mozambique Urban Water Security Project(P509890)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
Mozambique                     P509890                      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN           30-Apr-2025                  30-May-2025                    Water
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Republic of Mozambique       Ministry of Public Works,
Financing (IPF)                                             Housing, and Water
                                                            Resources

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Increase access to improved water supply services and to improve the sustainability of water supply services in
selected cities.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                            146.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                 146.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                    146.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                    146.00
        of which IDA Recommitted                                                                                  146.00


                                                                                                                     Page 1
          The World Bank
          Mozambique Urban Water Security Project(P509890)


           IDA Grant                                                                                                                   146.00




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                     Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                      The review did authorize the preparation to continue




    Other Decision (as needed)

    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context
    1.      Mozambique has experienced significant economic fluctuations over the past few decades. Following the end
    of the civil war in 1992, the country saw robust economic growth, averaging 7.9 percent from 1993 to 2015. However,
    the revelation of undisclosed debts in 2016, natural disasters in 2019, and ongoing conflict in the Cabo Delgado province
    have hindered growth, which averaged 3 percent between 2016 and 2019, followed by an increase from -1.2 to 5.4
    percent, between 2020 and 2023, reflecting the post-Coronavirus Disease 2019 recovery. Despite these challenges,
    Mozambique's economic growth is expected to strengthen, with projections of 8 percent growth over 2024-2027, driven
    by recovery in services, increased liquified natural gas production, and high commodity prices. The current account deficit
    is anticipated to remain high but will be financed through trade credits and foreign direct investment, with gross reserves
    expected to stay at comfortable levels.1
    2.      Mozambique is one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change in the region, and its economic growth
    is historically correlated to climate shocks. A catastrophe risk modeling study estimates that Mozambique faces average
    annual losses of US$440 million due to floods alone.2 A recent analysis of climate shocks and household well-being in
    Mozambique finds that a cyclone, flood, or drought event can lead to a 25–30 percent drop in per capita food
    consumption and 0.4 fewer meals per day per person. Exposure of Maputo, Gaza, and Inhambane provinces to extreme
    temperature, recurrent droughts, extreme precipitation, and flooding was assessed as high, with moderate impacts to
    physical infrastructure and assets. This implies that potentially damaging and life-threatening floods and droughts are
    expected to occur at least once during the 30-year life span of planned infrastructure.
    3.     Investments in water security have led to significant economic and human development gains. The
    socioeconomic gains of water investments in Mozambique are evident in the main urban centers, where more than two
    decades of consistent investments and the contribution of the local private sector have resulted in increased access to a
    water supply, from 60 percent in 2000 to close to 90 percent in 2020, and contributed to a reduction in child mortality
    from 95 (per 1,000 children) in 2003 to 69 in 2011, as well as a reduction in the prevalence of diarrheal diseases in children


1 World Bank. 2023. Mozambique - Country Climate and Development Report (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. Available at:

    https://imagebank2.worldbank.org/Search/34206509
2
    World Bank. 2018. Extreme Weather and Household Well-being: Evidence from Multiple Shocks in Mozambique. Policy Research Working Paper;
    No. 8667.

                                                                                                                                          Page 2
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project(P509890)


 under five, from 13.4 percent in 2003 to 9.9 percent in 2018.3, 4, 5 Further, the gains in the water sector have contributed
 to narrowing the gap in gender equality and led to the creation of jobs. Nevertheless, the water sector still lags behind
 sector goals by 2030.


 Sectoral and Institutional Context
 4.     A substantial share of the Mozambican urban population continues to lack access to safely managed drinking
 water services. Although access to basic water in urban areas has reached around 87 percent in 2022,6 the service
 continues to suffer from intermittent supply. In addition, a significant portion of the urban population lacks access to a
 piped connection, with 8 percent relying on public standpipes and 17 percent on taps in neighbors’ dwelling.7,8 At
 present, none of the 21 main cities served by the 15 primary systems9 have continuous water supply service, with only
 7 systems reaching the target service level of 16 hours of supply per day defined by the Water Regulatory Authority
 (AURA) as the threshold for good performance.10 With the urban population growth rate at 4.4 percent per year11, public
 drinking water service managed by state agencies is not expanding at the same speed as the growth of urban
 settlements. Therefore, private water providers (PWP) are filling the gap in service expansion and access,12 mainly in
 peri-urban areas. In the Greater Maputo Region, where 97 percent of the population has access to improved water
 sources,13 with the public water service covering 49 percent of the population.14 Therefore, above 40 percent of the
 urban population relies on services from PWP, most of them unlicensed15 and abstracting groundwater from poorly
 drilled boreholes that put the aquifers at risk of contamination. In addition, PWPs charge a tariff 51 percent higher than
 the public utility, meaning that poor households in periurban areas pay more for drinking water service.16
 5.    Increased investment in urban water supply has not always translated into improved services. The latest
 regulator’s report for 2023 indicates that 12 out of 15 main urban water supply systems have a poor performance.17 The
 2020 Water Sector Public Expenditure Review (PER)18 indicates that, from 2013 to 2018, increases in the Water Supply

3 MISAU (Ministério da Saúde). 2005. Demographic and Health Survey 2003 Report.
4 MISAU (Ministério da Saúde). 2013. Demographic and Health Survey 2011 Report.
5 MISAU (Ministério da Saúde). 2018. Inquérito de indicadores de imunização, malária e HIV 2015.
6 WHO (World Health Organization), and UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2020. Joint Monitoring Program – Mozambique Rural and Urban

Service Levels. link.
7 According to the Service Regulation Report for 2019 (AURA 2022) the highest level of use of standpipes of 26 percent of the urban population was

registered in Nampula and Angoche cities.
8 INE 2021. Results from the Households Budget Survey 2019/20.
9 A single water system can provide water services to contiguous cities. This is the case of the Greater Maputo system which provides access to

Maputo and Matola, the most populated urban centers of the country.
10 AURA 2024. Service Regulation Report for year 2023.
11 World Bank. 2022. Data Portal. Urban population growth (annual percent) – Mozambique. link:

https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.URB.GROW?locations=MZ
12 A Survey conducted by the National Directorate of Water Supply and Sanitation in 2018, identified 1,830 PWP supplying water to 1.8 million

people through piped connections mainly in urban areas from the Southern Region, with more than 75 percent of total share of this business,
nearly 1.4 million in the Greater Maputo Region.
13 INE 2020. Results from the Census 2017.
14 AURA 2022. Service Regulation Report for year 2019.
15Only 20 percent of the private water supply systems were licensed by the end 2019.
16 The tariff updates from November 2021 fixed the PWP tariff in 70 MT per cubic meter for system connected to the power grid and 80 MT per

cubic meter for systems powered by diesel generators (Resolution 3/2021 from AURA). The average tariff for the Greater Maputo Region for the
public utility was fixed at 46.28 MT per cubic meter (Resolution 2/2021 from AURA).
17 A performance compounded index below 50 percent is considered low and attributed the lowest rating “C” in the five-range scale (A+, A, B+, B

and C).
18 DH Infrastructure and MB Consulting. 2020. Public Expenditure Review of the Mozambican Water Sector 2010-2018 (prepared for the World

Bank).

                                                                                                                                             Page 3
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project(P509890)


 Asset Holding and Investment Fund (Fundo de Investimento e Património do Abastecimento de Água, FIPAG)
 expenditures resulted in only small increases in urban water supply access, and coincided with declining financial and
 operational performance and quality of service. Currently, FIPAG is not able to make payments on its contracted debt
 due to the poor operational and financial performance of the Regional Operating Companies (ROCs)19 and its own
 operational structure and costs. While the main financial problem is low collection rates - most ROCs have collection
 rates below 80 percent - non-revenue water (NRW) remains the biggest operational problem for ROCs and the largest
 contributor to poor financial performance. No ROC has consistently reduced NRW, and most ROCs report NRW of around
 50 percent. Although part of this decline in service can be associated with underfunding of the sector and the rapid
 population growth in the main cities, it indicates that a more sustainable expansion of the water supply service demands
 a paradigm shift from concentrated investments in infrastructure to a coupling of investments with managerial and
 institutional strengthening that includes incentives for service performance improvement.
 6.    The occurrence of droughts is correlated with the decrease in drinking water service performance indicators.
 The Southern Region has the highest occurrence of droughts in the country. A prolonged drought which affected the
 Umbeluzi river basin between 2014 and 2019 reduced water availability causing restrictions in drinking water supply,
 with average hours of supply declining in Greater Maputo to the lowest value of nine hours per day. Besides decline in
 volume, deteriorating water quality in both surface and groundwater sources is threatening urban water security. Poor
 watershed protection, with an increased loss of natural vegetation to cropland and use of fertilizers in buffer zones is
 contributing to a reduction in water quality in Guiua, Inhanombe and Jatingue (main water source to Chibuto city) rivers.
 7.    Strengthening urban water security requires a comprehensive response. This includes improving the
 management of challenging hydrological environments to secure water in quantity and quality at the source,
 strengthening weak water institutions, and reversing the under-investment in water infrastructure. The recent
 investments to increase storage capacity at Corumana Dam20 combined with Phase I of the Sabie water treatment plant
 (WTP) and complementary transport and distribution infrastructure,21 have together successfully contributed to
 improve water security in the Greater Maputo Region.22 Nevertheless, despite these investments, several operational
 challenges remain. The overall water service reliability throughout the system did not improve as the broader
 operational challenges of the utility have not been addressed, including high rates of NRW (estimated at 48 percent in
 2024).23
 8.    Women and girls experience the greatest burden of inadequate Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH).
 Although Mozambique has been experiencing a positive socio-demographic transformation, with women increasingly
 taking a lead role in the economy and society, women are “time poor” relative to men. This is mostly driven by the
 unequal division of labor within the household caused by the extra time women and school-aged girls devote to fetching
 water from public standpipes. Furthermore, with one in three women having experienced some form of gender-based
 violence (GBV) in Mozambique, the risks are higher for women without access to water in the premises. Growing
 evidence points to widespread fear or experiences of GBV while collecting water from public water points or using shared
 or public latrine blocks.


19 The Water supply in main urban centers is done by four regional utilities covering the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area, Southern Region,

Central Region and Northern Region.
20 Mozambique - National Water Resources Development Project (P107350). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. link:

https://projects.worldbank.org/pt/projects-operations/project-detail/P107350
21 Greater Maputo Water Supply and Expansion Project (P125120). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. link:

https://projects.worldbank.org/pt/projects-operations/project-detail/P125120
22 At present the Umbeluzi WTP is the main water source with a treatment capacity of 240,000 cubic meters per day, followed by Sabie WTP with

60,000 cubic meters per day, and boreholes in Kongolote, Intaka, Mali and KaTembe with a production of 9,400 cubic meters per day.
23 Data on key performance indicators for primary systems shared by FIPAG.



                                                                                                                                               Page 4
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project(P509890)


 9.    The Ministry of Public Works, Housing, and Water Resources (MOPHRH) has the overall responsibility for the
 water sector. The MOPHRH’s National Directorate for Water Supply and Sanitation (DNAAS) oversees policy
 development, planning, and investment promotion in WASH, while the National Directorate for Water Resources
 Management (DNGRH) oversees water resources management. In the water resources management sub-sector, three
 (Southern, Central and Northern) Regional Water Administrations (ARAs) are responsible for the operational
 management, allocation, conservation and investments on water resources and related infrastructure.
 10. The urban WSS sector is structured under the Delegated Management Framework (DMF). Under the DMF, three
 institutions were created to serve as the backbone of the urban WSS sector in the country: the Water Supply Asset
 Holding and Investment Fund (FIPAG); the Water and Sanitation Infrastructure Administration (AIAS, created 10 years
 after FIPAG, during the second phase of the DMF); and the Water Regulatory Authority (AURA). FIPAG owns the country’s
 main water systems (serving 21 major urban areas) and is responsible for contracting operators for the ROCs. AIAS is the
 national investment and asset management agency for 130 small towns and district headquarters (and contracts with
 operators to run those systems), and for sanitation in both primary and secondary towns. AURA has the overall
 responsibility for ensuring a balance between the quality of the WSS service provided, the interests of users, and the
 economic sustainability of the water supply systems, through economic regulation.
 11. The process of attracting and transferring system operations to the private sector has been slow due to poor
 financial viability and operational complexities in major urban water systems. Only one FIPAG system has ever been
 effectively transferred to a private operator (PO) – the water system in Greater Maputo.24 However, that transfer was
 not considered successful, and despite the separation of operations from asset ownership for two decades, service
 delivery and operational performance in Greater Maputo has not improved. Therefore, the contracting strategy and
 accountability framework needs to be reviewed to incentivize private sector investment and expansion and
 improvements in quality of services. There is also the need to derisk the sector to attract private investment. Progress
 in this direction was made with the approval of a decree with a clear framework for regular annual tariff adjustment
 based on the principles of cost recovery and affordability, thus clarifying the mechanism to reinstate the economic and
 financing equilibrium when significant changes occur in the operating context.
 12. The water sector’s medium-term investment plan is outlined in the Water Sector Action Plan (PASA, 2015-
 2030),25 which supports the achievement of SDGs, and is in line with the National Strategy for Urban Water and
 Sanitation (ENASU, 2011–2025) and the National Water Resources Plan (NWRP).26 Building on a consistent track record
 of investments in major urban centers through the National Water Development Projects I and II (P039015 and P052240,
 1998 to 2009), the National Water Resources Development Program (P107350, 2012-2020), the Greater Maputo Water
 Supply Project (2015-2021) and the Water Services and Institutional Support (WASIS, P104566, 2007-2015) and WASIS
 II (P149377, 2016 to date), the GoM is committed to increasing investments to secure water at source in both quantity
 and quality to meet increasing urban demand, expand treatment and distribution capacity, to promoting efficiency in
 service delivery, and fostering sustainability, with the aim of delivering safely managed water to all. The proposed project
 will support the implementation of the PASA and the updated investment plan for the urban water sector.



24 The Great Maputo system was operated by a consortium of Portuguese (Aguas de Portugal, AdP) and French (SAUR) operators between 2000

and 2010 but was eventually transferred back to FIPAG. In December 2001, SAUR International left the consortium following a strategic decision
from its main shareholder, Bouygues Group, of eliminating less lucrative business. AdP assumed the lead of the consortium and remained in this
position until December 2010. FIPAG bought the shares from AdP, following an agreement with this company, and became the main shareholder
representing the Mozambican state. AdM was renamed Águas da Região de Maputo (AdeM). The lease contract between FIPAG and AdeM ended
in November 2018.
25 Resolution 40/2018 from the Council of Ministers. Approval of the Water Sector Action Plan for Implementation of the Sustainable Development

Goals 2015-2030.
26 Resolution 11/2019 from the Council of Ministers. Approval of the National Water Resources Plan.



                                                                                                                                           Page 5
     The World Bank
     Mozambique Urban Water Security Project(P509890)


13. In addition, to providing support for water supply service improvements, the World Bank (WB) also supports
complementary interventions in urban sanitation. These include the Mozambique Urban Sanitation Project (MUSP,
P161777) which is financing the rehabilitation and extension works of the Infulene wastewater treatment plant, serving
Maputo and Matola cities, and priority sewerage network. Furthermore, the Maputo Urban Transformation Project
(P171449) is financing the improvement of the urban drainage system in Maputo City. This new operation will also
complement the active institutional development support provided by the WASIS II.


Relationship to CPF
14. The Project is consistent with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Mozambique for
FY23‐27 discussed by the Board on February 23, 2023 (Report N°176672). The Project primarily contributes to the
“Inclusive green job creation” (High‐Level Outcome Two) by expanding infrastructure services (objective 6). The Project
will improve water supply services and utilities’ creditworthiness; this will also ultimately help diversify the sources of
investment financing to meet the goal of universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all by
2030. Water is a vital factor in production and job creation, and the Project will enable the growth of micro, small, and
medium enterprises (objective 5) operating in the water supply and contribute to job creation. The Project also supports
“More inclusive institutions” (High‐Level Outcome One) by enhancing public sector capacity for inclusive public services
(objective 2) in the water sector and investing in institutional strengthening, including providing financial incentives for
performance improvement of water utilities. Last, it will contribute to “Improved human capital and women’s
empowerment” (High‐Level Outcome Three), supporting the improvement of selected health and education outcomes
(objective 7) through the reduction of the lack of access through the reduction of the lack of access to WASH at home
and school that has a negative impact on children’s health and education, particularly for girls.
15. The project contributes to the WBG twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity and
is well aligned with the principles of Green, Resilient and Inclusive Development (GRID). Reliable and affordable
sources of clean water is an essential precondition for a healthy population and robust economic activity, especially in
the Mozambican context of high incidences of WASH-related diseases and constrained economic activity. This project is
closely aligned with the GRID approach to promoting a strong and durable recovery and growth through green, resilient,
and inclusive development as it contributes to boosting human capital as a foundation for shared prosperity by targeting
investments in inclusive and equitable access to WSS services in Mozambique’s poorest communities. In addition,
engagement of the private sector will foster job creation and economic transformation. The project also seeks to build
resilience to the impacts of climate change and other shocks and stresses by promoting adaptation measures such as
climate-resilient infrastructure design, mitigation measures, including non-revenue water reduction, and sustainability
of infrastructure investments and solar-powered infrastructure.
16. The project also supports the sector strategies, particularly the project contributes to implementation of the
PASA 2015–2029, the water sector action plan for the achievement of the SDG6–universal access to safe WSS, and the
NWRP 2018, contributing to the objective of increasing the resilience of existing strategic storage infrastructure; the
project also encourages PSP and clarity of institutional functions in WSS service delivery in the urban space under the
DMF set by the ENASU 2011–2025. The project will also contribute to Mozambique’s Nationally Determined Contribution
(NDC) by reducing people’s vulnerability to climate-change-related vector-borne diseases and develop resilient climate
infrastructures, on the adaptation side.




                                                                                                                       Page 6
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project(P509890)


C. Proposed Development Objective(s)



 17. The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to improved water supply services and to
 improve the sustainability of water supply services in selected cities.

 Key Results (From PCN)
18.    Successful achievement of the PDO above will be measured with the following proposed key results indicators:
        a. Number of people provided with access to improved water supply services (disaggregated by male and
           female)
        b. Operating cost recovery ratio (operating revenues divided by operating costs)


D. Concept Description


19.     The project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) of a proposed amount of US$ 146 million, with Performance-
Based Conditions (PBC). The project is expected to last for five years. The use of PBC will serve as an incentive for
strengthening services and institutions, and for operational performance improvement. The Project financing will focus
on: (i) supporting strategic reforms and institutional strengthening; (ii) developing attractive service delivery models
including O&M of water supply; and (iii) earmarked investments to secure water sources, increase water treatment,
transport, and distribution capacity, with high impact in utilities technical and financial performance.
20.    The project will focus on the Greater Maputo Region, complementing past investments from two WB financed
projects to increase water storage (the NWRDP) and production to meet the demand (the GMWSP) in this area. In
addition, this operation will also support priority investments in WSS serving the Southern Region to improve their
climate resilience (reducing their vulnerability to droughts) and improve their efficiency and sustainability.
21.      The Project’s three main components are: (i) C1. Water sector development support to improving the enabling
environment for private sector participation (PSP); (ii) C2. Sustainable and climate resilient service delivery (access); and
(iii) C3. Improvement of performance and efficiency of services. In addition, the Project includes a cross-cutting area
aiming at human capital strengthening. The scope of each component is described below.
Component 1. Water sector development support to improving the enabling environment for PSP (US$34 million
equivalent)
22.    Component 1 will support several critical actions underpinning the operationalization of a sector reform effort
led by the Government of Mozambique (GoM) to improve the enabling environment for PSP and to achieve universal
and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water and to improve the. This component will be divided into
three sub-components, specifically:
(a) Support for the implementation of the second generation of the DMF for water supply systems, including the
    envisaged engagement of the private sector in the four ROCs created in May 2021. This sub-component will support
    FIPAG in managing the process of restructuring the urban water supply sector, including strengthening it to be an
    institution focused on investment and asset management, migrating from its previous focus on operations.
(b) Improvement of policies and regulatory environment for PWPs, which will also support the development of the
    legal framework for the integration of PWP services into the regulated service provision (the development of


                                                                                                                        Page 7
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project(P509890)


     technical standards, including best practices for climate-proofing of operations and service, and bulk water supply
     models), including the licensing and monitoring of their water quality and services.
 (c) Strengthening the regulatory role of AURA to promote efficiency and inclusiveness in the provision of services by
     extending them to the poorest segments of the population and reducing the risk of investment in the sector through
     economic regulation that guarantees tariffs that fully cover operating costs, debt service, a return on private
     investment and ensure service to poor segments of the population.
Component 2. Access to sustainable and climate resilient water services (US$50 million equivalent)
 23.     Component 2 will support a combination of interventions from source to tap to strengthen the climate
 resilience and sustainability of urban water supply services that are regularly affected by climate-change-exacerbated
 droughts and floods events, contributing to the implementation of priority climate adaptation investments enacted in
 the country’s NDC, specifically under the water resources and resilient water supply and sanitation systems strategic
 area. Component 2 is structured in three sub-components, specifically:
(a) Expansion of access to climate-resilient water supply, including investments for the expansion of water treatment
    and transport capacity, as well as downstream investments to expand the distribution network following the key
    principles for climate-resilient water infrastructure design, with key water treatment plant (WTP), pumping stations,
    and bridge crossings for main pipes designed to withstand and be installed above historic flood levels, following the
    protocol for climate-proofing of water supply infrastructure and service.27
(b) Improvement of the quality of services provided by PWPs through grants for upgrading PWP water supply
    infrastructure to comply with technical standards, with best practices for climate-proofing of operations and service,
    and to enable them to distribute bulk water supply purchased from the regional utilities.
(c) Reducing climate hazards impacting water supply infrastructure and services through Integrated Water Resources
    Management (IWRM) and watershed management, including providing strategic support to ARA-Sul to fulfill its
    mandate, covering investments that will contribute to strengthening of climate-informed water planning and
    allocation, the enhancement of water quality through improved watershed management that reduces climate-
    change-exacerbated water source contamination, assurance of water availability to meet urban demand via source
    diversification and demand conservation, licensing of water users, strengthening of management and ARA-Sul’s
    financial sustainability, capacity building, including in climate-risk prevention, management and response, and
    institutional development support.
Component 3. Improvement of performance and efficiency of services (US$60 million equivalent)
 24.     Component 3 will support the improvement of performance and efficiency of water supply services in the
 GMMA and Southern Region provided by AdRMM and AdRS respectively, allocating one-third of the project investments
 to activities that will contribute to lower energy consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, specifically NRW
 reduction and energy efficiency.
(a) Performance improvement for the service area of the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area (GMMA). Carrying out a
    performance-based program of activities defined under a Performance Improvement Action Plan (PIAP) for the
    GMMA, which include investments for (i) NRW reduction led by the utility not covered by the NRW Performance-
    Based Contract (PBC) (3.c), (ii) improving energy efficiency, (iii) improving the collection ratio and the operational cost
    coverage ratio, (iv) digitalization of operations, (v) training and capacity building in key areas for the utilities, (vi)
    women empowerment within, (vii) improving ROC governance and accountability, (viii) establishment of
    communications platforms for information sharing on water quality and services and timely resolution of complaints,
    and (ix) implementation of the turn-around plans derived from the Utilities of the Future (UoF) assessment.


27 WBG. 2020. Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief. Link: http://hdl.handle.net/10986/34448



                                                                                                                          Page 8
       The World Bank
       Mozambique Urban Water Security Project(P509890)


(b) Performance improvement for the Southern Region service area. Carrying out a performance-based program of
    activities defined under a PIAP for the Southern Region, which include investments for (i) co-management contract
    for NRW reduction, (ii) improving energy efficiency, (iii) improving the collection ratio and the operational cost
    coverage ratio, (iv) digitalization of operations, (v) training and capacity building, (vi) women empowerment, (vii)
    improving utility’s governance and accountability, (viii) establishing of communications platforms for information
    sharing on water quality and services and timely resolution of complaints, and (ix) implementation of the turn-around
    plans derived from the UoF assessment.
(c) NRW PBC for Greater Maputo area. PBC for NRW reduction to be signed between FIPAG and a contractor to be
    selected on a competitive basis to implement investments to reduce NRW, including investments to reduce both
    physical and commercial losses, management technologies, and capacity-building programs, in the service areas of
    GMMA and the Southern Region.
Component 4. Project Management Support (US$2 million equivalent)
25.    Project management support comprises technical assistance and incremental operating costs to ensure fiduciary
compliance including financial management (FM), procurement and environment and social safeguards, monitoring and
evaluation (M&E). This component will support necessary equipment (e.g. computers, software and other goods),
capacity building (training), and incremental staff to allow the project implementing unit to carry out their
responsibilities.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                   Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                        Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                  No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Jaime Palalane
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Pierre Francois-Xavier Boulenger
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist



                                                                                                                     Page 9
     The World Bank
     Mozambique Urban Water Security Project(P509890)


Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Republic of Mozambique

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Public Works, Housing, and Water Resources
 Raul Mutevuie Júnior
 National Director
 bombatejunior@gmail.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Jaime Palalane, Pierre Francois-Xavier Boulenger

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Francis Ghesquiere                     06-Mar-2025

Country Director:                      Antonio Benigno Nunez                  07-Apr-2025




                                                                                            Page 10
