Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                   (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 03/17/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04071




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 21, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P509738                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)     KEWASIP                     2025

                     Operation Name            Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Kenya                     Kenya                                  EASTERN AND                 Environment, Natural
                                                                                      SOUTHERN AFRICA             Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                  Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Kenya         State Department of Forestry           28-Feb-2025                 18-Jun-2025


                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     22-Jan-2025               200,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to expand the area under sustainable land and watershed management
                     and to improve livelihoods of communities in the project areas.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The KEWASIP will support a subset of activities contained in The National Landscape and Ecosystems Restoration
                     Programme Strategy. Under the KEWASIP the selected activities are expected to be grouped under three Results Areas:
                     (i) strengthened watershed planning, governance, and monitoring; (ii) watershed services and landscape restoration
                     (private/communal lands); (iii) Public land management and restoration (public/protected lands).




                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                  Page 2 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The operation will be financed through an Investment Project Financing (IPF) modality. The KEWASIP has a nationwide
                     scope and will benefit prioritized sub-basins as guided by the Land Degradation Index Map, with considerations on
                     vegetation cover and quality, rainfall erosivity and soil erodibility, and population density. Also, the selection of sub-
                     basins to benefit from the Project considered degradation in vegetation as measured by net primary productivity (NPP)
                     and normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI), inherent risk of soil erosion, potential beneficiaries of interventions,
                     conservation priorities, and the projected costs associated with implementing sustainable landscape and watersheds
                     management (SLWM) practices. The KEWASIP will support a subset of activities in five (5) watersheds covering including
                     Mount Marsabit, Marmamet, Nyambene, Chyullu Hills, and Shimba Hills, and covering 12 counties including Garrissa,
                     Isiolo, Kitui, Kwale, Laikipia, Marsabit, Makueni, Meru, Baringo, Tharaka Nithi, Samburu, and Tana River. The Ministry of
                     Environment, Climate Change, and Forestry (MoECCF) will implement the KEWASIP in coordination with technical
                     agencies including the State Department of Forestry, State Department of Environment, State Department of Water,
                     State Department of Agriculture, State Department of Wildlife, State Department of Irrigation, Water Resources
                     Authority, Kenya Forest Service (KFS), Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS), National Environment Management Authority, and
                     the Council of Governors.

                     Through strengthening governance structures under Component 1, there will be promotion of diversified rural
                     livelihoods, improved access to information through an integrated monitoring system, built resilience to climate change
                     and enhanced sustainable management of natural resources. However, there is potential exclusion of vulnerable and
                     marginalized groups (VMGs) and indigenous peoples (IPs) representation in the governance structures and recognition




Public Disclosure
                     of their rights; displacement of communities due to access restrictions through establishment of protected areas or
                     changes in land use; limited stakeholder engagement including with VMGs and IPs; if benefits from ecosystem services
                     are not distributed fairly, VMGs and IPs may be left out, exacerbating existing inequalities and leading to social tensions;
                     potential loss of cultural identity by the undervalue of traditional ecological knowledge through adoption of modern
                     governance and management practices; competition for natural resources could intensify, potentially leading to
                     social/community conflicts also with external stakeholders; efforts to promote climate-resilient landscapes might
                     disrupt existing economic activities impacting living standards; and concerns on data privacy and the potential misuse of
                     information related to land use and community activities.

                     Component 2 investments on private and community lands will build resilient livelihoods for local communities by
                     adopting a participatory approach, community engagements in planning and implementation will enhance
                     collaboration, ownership and better management of resources by upstream and downstream users, community
                     capacities will be strengthened, sustainable land use promoted, and economic opportunities created. Potentially,
                     livelihoods restoration activities may displace communities and disrupt their livelihoods, lead to inequitable access to
                     resources and increased inequalities, exclusion of VMGs and IPs and changes in land use and resource management
                     could negatively impact existing economic activities. Investments on gazetted and protected areas will enhance land
                     restoration and watershed management capacity of Kenya Forest Service (KFS) and Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS), foster
                     community engagement through public-private partnerships, and increase biodiversity. Restoration activities will create
                     job opportunities, improve ecosystem services such as water purification and soil fertility, and raise environmental
                     awareness among local populations. Additionally, there will be enhanced resilience to climate change, improved food
                     security, preserved cultural heritage, and strengthened infrastructure within protected areas, ultimately benefiting
                     community well-being and promoting sustainable environmental practices. However, increased management of


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     protected areas might displace communities due to land use changes and access restrictions, disrupt existing livelihoods
                     that rely on unsustainable land management practices, exclusion of VMGs and IPs from benefiting from restoration
                     initiatives and coordination of multiple stakeholders and communities may affect implementation and lead to increased
                     grievances. Component 3 initiatives on training & capacity building of stakeholders at the national and county levels will
                     enhance E&S risks and impacts management and sustainability as well as understanding of the Bank’s Environmental
                     and Social Framework (ESF).

                     The project’s interventions are confined entirely within Kenya’s borders and focus on selected key water towers,
                     including: Chyulu Hills and Shimba Hills Water Towers in the Athi-Galana Basin; Mt. Marsabit and Marmanet Forest
                     Water Towers within the Ewaso Nyiro Ngiro North (ENN) Drainage Basin; and the Nyambene Hills Water Tower which
                     falls within both the Tana and Ewaso Nyiro drainage basins. The Athi-Galana and Tana drainage basins empty into the
                     Indian Ocean within Kenya’s territorial waters. Although the Umba and Lumi Rivers, located southwest and near the
                     Athi-Galana drainage basin, are shared between Kenya and Tanzania, no project activities are planned within their
                     catchments. The Umba river originates from Tanzania’s Usambara mountains and flows into the Indian ocean within
                     Kenya, while the Lumi River originates from the eastern side of Mt Kilimanjaro and runs along the Kenya-Tanzania
                     border into Tanzania. The ENN Basin borders Ethiopia to the north and Somalia to the east. Its main river, the Ewaso
                     Nyiro, empties into Lorian Swamp within Kenya. Lorian swamp is one of sources of recharge for the Merti aquifer that
                     straddles Kenya and Somalia. KEWASIP will not involve any abstraction of water or contribute to any waste discharges
                     into Ewaso Ngiro river that could potentially affect the Merti aquifer. The project does not propose any
                     activities/interventions that aim to control floods. However, sustainable landscape and watershed management
                     activities have the benefit of reducing risks of flooding in the downstream areas of the watershed if they are prone to




Public Disclosure
                     flooding.

                     To inform Project implementation, the MoECCF is undertaking an E&S assessment that includes, (i) developing a process
                     framework to address E&S risks and impacts related to restrictions on access to natural resources in legally designated
                     parks and protected areas which will inform the development of appropriate management plans which may include a
                     Resettlement Plan, Livelihood Restoration Plan, Indigenous Peoples Plan, and/or Benefit Sharing Plan/Agreement; (ii) an
                     evaluation of the institutional frameworks for the KFS and KWS for recommendations on strengthening their codes of
                     conduct, aligned with Good Practice Notes (GPN) on the use of armed security and other internationally accepted
                     practices; (iii) a social conflict analysis to assess the extent to which project activities might exacerbate existing tensions
                     and inequalities or be affected by ongoing conflicts; (iv) an E&S technical capacities and systems assessment of
                     implementing entities to enhance management and sustainability measures; and (v) a review of the existing Grievance
                     Redress Mechanism of implementing entities for enhancement. The outcome of the E&S assessment, to be completed
                     by effectiveness, will inform the development of specific E&S instruments during implementation for the KEWASIP, in
                     line with the ESF. Additionally, the Bank has undertaken its own due diligence to evaluate the capacity of the
                     implementing agencies to manage E&S risks, with a focus on their ability to identify, mitigate, manage, and monitor
                     these risks in accordance with the Bank’s ESF specifically on institutional structure and governance capacity, human
                     resource capacity, environmental and social risk management systems, monitoring and reporting capacity, technical and
                     financial resources, stakeholder engagement and community interaction, previous project experience and track record,
                     and coordination between the MoECCF and other agencies. Gap filling measures and tools have been incorporated in
                     the the ESCP, SEP and ESMF.




                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                         Page 4 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     Key aspects mainstreamed in the E&S instruments and implemented for systems and capacity strengthening include; (i)
                     training and capacity building on climate resilience, GBV/SEA-SH, and biodiversity monitoring; (ii) enhanced monitoring
                     using modern environmental monitoring tools, including satellite imagery, remote sensing, and mobile data collection
                     systems; (iii) improved stakeholder engagement through culturally appropriate, meaningful and inclusive stakeholder
                     engagement, with special attention to IPs and VMGs; and (iv) E&S budget allocations under KEWASIP for E&S risks and
                     impacts management, particularly for monitoring, stakeholder engagement, grievance redress and mitigating,
                     alternative or compensating measures necessary for potentially affected communities/persons by displacement,
                     resettlement and restrictions on access to gazetted forests or restricted areas.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Kenya has made substantial efforts to address the causes of natural resource degradation by developing policies,
                     enacting legislation to protect resources, and establishing institutions responsible for implementing and enforcing these
                     measures. The government also allocates annual budgets to line ministries and Semi-Autonomous Government
                     Agencies (SAGAs) to support their mandates. The Environmental Management and Coordination Act (EMCA), 1999,
                     marked a significant milestone as a framework law, leading to the revision of various sectoral laws to align with its
                     objectives and prompting institutions to develop policies, codes of practice, and compliance procedures.

                     Key ministries, including the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Forestry (MoECCF), Ministry of Agriculture
                     and Livestock Development (MoALD), Ministry of Water, Sanitation and Irrigation (MoWSI), Ministry of Roads and
                     Transport, Ministry of Education, and the Ministry of Lands, Public Works, Housing and Urban Development, along with
                     their SAGAs, have integrated environmental and social risk management by dedicating resources (in-house E&S staff




Public Disclosure
                     and budgets) and including E&S provisions in procurement processes. These entities have also served as Executing or
                     Implementing agencies for numerous donor-funded projects, some of which require adherence to the donor’s
                     environmental and social framework in addition to the national E&S framework. Development partners such as the
                     World Bank, African Development Bank, Trade Development Bank, and Agence Française de Développement (AFD) have
                     supported these entities in addressing E&S considerations in project implementation. World Bank-financed
                     interventions where compliance with the Safeguards Policies or ESF has been sufficiently demonstrated include the
                     Kenya Climate Smart Agricultures Project (P154784, KCSAP), the Financing Locally-Led Climate Action Program
                     (P173065, FLOCCA), Kenya Agricultural Productivity and Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P088600,
                     KAPSLMP), the Kenya Water Security and Climate Resilience Project (P117635, KWSCRP) and the Water and Sanitation
                     Development Project (P156634, WSDP).

                     The main implementing entity, (MoECCF), has gained substantial E&S experience from implementing other donor-
                     funded interventions. However, the State Department of Forestry, which will constitute the National Project
                     Coordinating Unit (NPCU) has limited prior experience with implementation of World Bank projects, applying the ESF,
                     and there is overall inadequate ESRM capacity at the county and ward levels. This capacity will be strengthened at the
                     national level by recruiting on a full time basis, one environmental officer and one social officer. Additionally, each
                     participating county will have both officers employed full-time, and equipped with the necessary qualifications and
                     experience. The MoECCF will also hire gender-based violence (GBV) and Labour and Occupational Health and Safety
                     (OHS) consultants on part-time basis for the efficient delivery of Technical Assistance (TA) related activities. A capacity
                     building plan will be developed and implemented throughout project implementation, and will include annual E&S
                     capacity building activities, at the national, county and community levels. Implementation of the capacity building plan
                     is provided for in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     Environmental risks are rated "Substantial." The project has many environmental benefits including improved land
                     management which reduces soil erosion, enhances groundwater recharge, and stabilizes river flows, ensuring reliable
                     water supply for ecosystems and communities. Project activities to restore degraded riparian zones, wetlands, and
                     the rehabilitation of water harvesting structures could have varying effects on water flow and availability as the
                     interventions could lead to reduced volumes, in the short term. Water resources are scarce in many areas targeted by
                     KEWASIP, and improper management could worsen the situation, leading to reduced access to water for downstream
                     users. Large-scale restoration can prevent erosion, but in the short term, soil disturbance (e.g., tree planting,
                     construction of terraces or gabions) could lead to increased sediment runoff into rivers and lakes, further contributing
                     to water degradation and affecting aquatic ecosystems. Erosion management in catchment areas will also reduce
                     sediment loads and deposition in downstream floodplains, which may deprive aquatic habitats and agricultural
                     activities of essential nutrients found in the sediments. As climate variability increases, the projected rise in extreme
                     weather events—such as prolonged droughts and intense rainfall—could exacerbate land degradation, making it
                     difficult for restored ecosystems to stabilize. The project involves significant ecosystem restoration, including
                     afforestation, reforestation, agroforestry, and the creation of green corridors. While the goals of these interventions
                     are positive, there are inherent risks. Afforestation efforts, if not well-planned, could inadvertently disturb wildlife
                     habitats, especially in areas where species have adapted to the degraded state of the land. Introducing tree species



Public Disclosure
                     unsuitable for the local ecosystem (e.g., non-native species) could also adversely affect plant community dynamics.
                     The creation of green corridors is aimed at linking fragmented habitats. However, poorly executed planning could
                     lead to further fragmentation if land tenure conflicts or inadequate land-use planning arises. Restoration within
                     gazetted forests and national parks carries risks of over-intervention, especially in sensitive ecosystems. For example,
                     overplanting or heavy use of machinery could disturb fragile habitats, and inadvertently introduce invasive plant
                     species. Prosopis juliflora and Lantana camara. are two key invasive species that have colonized many project areas,
                     including arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs, principally, Isiolo County). Interventions to mitigate their establishment and
                     colonization have so far yielded little success. While the removal and management of these species are priorities due
                     to the risk of economic and environmental harm they pose, interventions (such as uprooting or control measures)
                     must be carefully managed to avoid unintended consequences, such as increased soil erosion on cleared areas. There
                     are significant risks of regrowth and further infestation as invasive species tend to regenerate quickly unless proper
                     control measures are applied. Without continuous monitoring and maintenance, the restored ecosystems may soon
                     become reinfested, hampering restoration efforts. Community involvement in labour-intensive restoration activities,
                     such as tree planting and soil conservation, carries risks of injuries, particularly in areas with difficult terrain or
                     extreme weather conditions. In addition, invasive species management, particularly through the use of herbicides or
                     other chemical agents, could expose workers to harmful substances if proper safety measures are not in place.
                     Interventions could also pose community health and safety risks in instances such as where upstream activities cause
                     pollution of water sources relied upon by downstream users as the main source of drinking water, or where
                     inadequately managed civil works pose safety risks of harm to surrounding areas,
                                                                                                                                           High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     The Social risks are anticipated to be High due to the sensitivity of the targeted Project areas with the presence of
                     VMGs and IPs, and, concerns of social conflict. There are potential risks related to restrictions on land use or access to
                     land and natural resources, challenges in establishing equitable benefit-sharing mechanisms for investments on
                     community land, and the displacement of communities, which could affect their economic status and social cohesion.
                     Additional risks include the potential for adverse impacts on livelihoods from livelihood restoration activities, the
                     exclusion of IPs and VMGs from Project benefits, ineffective grievance management, and inadequate monitoring of
                     the effectiveness of livelihood restoration or improvement measures during implementation. To mitigate these risks,
                     the process framework will address E&S risks and impacts related to restrictions on access to natural resources in
                     legally designated parks and protected areas. The project will benefit watersheds that include IPs and VMGs.
                     Throughout project implementation, there is potential risks in non-adherence to culturally appropriate meaningful
                     consultation, obtaining free, prior and informed consent (FPIC), respect to human rights and natural resource based
                     livelihoods of IPs, and to recognize, respect and preserve the culture, knowledge, and practices of IPs in their unique
                     relationship with land and natural resources. The Process Framework will incorporate elements of ESS7 and guide the
                     development of appropriate mitigation measures or plans for IPs and VMGs. In addition, there are potential gaps in
                     social inclusion, gender considerations, and risks of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA). The project will ensure that
                     appropriate measures are incorporated to facilitate equitable access to resources and benefiting for all VMGs and IPs,
                     while also recognizing the gender roles in forest and water management. The project has prepared a Stakeholder
                     Engagement Plan (SEP) to ensure stakeholder input is integrated into the project design, mitigation strategies, and
                     that stakeholders are actively involved in decision-making processes. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will also
                     be developed to allow all stakeholders to raise concerns or grievances. The GRM will be transparent, culturally
                     appropriate, and accessible to all, including IPs and VMGs. It will also incorporate considerations for Sexual




Public Disclosure
                     Exploitation, Abuse, and Harassment (SEA/SH) and Gender-Based Violence (GBV) referral pathways.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      KEWASIP seeks to enhance watershed and landscape management while improving climate resilience, biodiversity
                      conservation, and community livelihoods. However, despite its long-term environmental and socio-economic
                      benefits, the project presents substantial to high environmental and social risks that must be mitigated through
                      strong planning, governance, and adaptive management. These risks span ecosystem disturbances, water resource
                      alterations, land-use conflicts, biodiversity concerns, and social vulnerabilities, including gender-based risks,
                      stakeholder exclusions, and governance weaknesses. One of the primary environmental risks of KEWASIP relates to
                      the potential disturbance of natural habitats and biodiversity. The large-scale reforestation, afforestation, and land
                      rehabilitation efforts, if not carefully managed, could alter ecosystems and threaten biodiversity. The introduction of
                      fast-growing or non-native tree species may disrupt the ecological balance, reducing the resilience of local flora and
                      fauna. In gazetted forests, overly intensive interventions risk disturbing fragile ecosystems, particularly in protected
                      and sensitive areas. Additionally, the removal of invasive species such as Prosopis juliflora must be carefully executed
                      to avoid unintended consequences, such as the displacement of native species or disruptions to local agricultural
                      productivity. Water resource management presents another critical challenge. Since the project involves
                      interventions in riparian zones, wetlands, and water catchment areas, there is a risk that modifications to water


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      retention structures and soil conservation techniques could alter hydrological cycles. Reduced downstream water
                      availability due to altered flow dynamics could impact both human consumption and ecosystem functions.
                      Furthermore, soil erosion and sedimentation risks arise from the land preparation activities required for reforestation
                      and rehabilitation. If not adequately controlled, these activities could lead to increased runoff, loss of topsoil, and
                      sedimentation in nearby water bodies, degrading water quality and affecting aquatic biodiversity. The impacts of
                      climate change further compound these environmental risks. Kenya’s watersheds are highly vulnerable to extreme
                      weather events, including prolonged droughts and flash floods, both of which could undermine KEWASIP’s landscape
                      restoration efforts. Higher temperatures and erratic rainfall patterns may threaten the survival of newly planted
                      vegetation, accelerate soil degradation, and increase the frequency of flooding events that destabilize the very
                      ecosystems the project seeks to restore. If the project’s water and flood management interventions are not climate-
                      proofed, they may struggle to remain effective in the face of shifting climatic conditions. The restoration and
                      conservation measures planned under KEWASIP also pose significant social risks, particularly in terms of land use
                      restrictions and access challenges. Many communities rely on forests, pasturelands, and riparian areas for their
                      livelihoods, whether for agriculture, grazing, or other economic activities. Conservation initiatives, particularly those
                      involving the establishment of green corridors, forest restoration, and community-led conservation programs, could
                      impose restrictions on land use that directly impact these communities. Pastoralist communities and Indigenous
                      Peoples, who depend on communal land for survival, are particularly at risk of displacement or livelihood disruptions.
                      Without carefully structured compensation mechanisms and alternative livelihood programs, such restrictions could
                      lead to heightened tensions and grievances. Beyond access restrictions, there is also the risk of economic
                      displacement if benefit-sharing mechanisms are not equitably structured. While KEWASIP aims to create employment
                      and economic opportunities through conservation-based livelihoods, there is a danger that certain communities,




Public Disclosure
                      particularly those not directly engaged in the project, may feel excluded from these benefits. The potential for elite
                      capture, where influential individuals or groups gain disproportionate advantages, could further deepen inequalities
                      and lead to community resentment. Livelihood restoration programs must be carefully designed to ensure that they
                      adequately compensate affected households and do not inadvertently worsen economic disparities. Another critical
                      social concern is the inclusion of Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs). Many of the
                      targeted watershed areas are home to communities with deep cultural and economic ties to the land. If KEWASIP fails
                      to engage these groups meaningfully, there is a risk that their traditional governance systems, land-use practices, and
                      cultural rights could be undermined. Without obtaining Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) from Indigenous
                      communities, the project could face significant resistance, particularly if the interventions alter their access to critical
                      resources without appropriate consultation and compensation. Gender-based risks, including Sexual Exploitation and
                      Abuse (SEA) and Gender-Based Violence (GBV), also require careful attention. The project’s activities will take place in
                      rural and remote areas, where power imbalances between project staff, contractors, and local communities could
                      increase vulnerabilities. Women and girls, particularly those engaged in project-related employment or community
                      initiatives, may face heightened risks of harassment and abuse. The potential labor risks are related to child labor,
                      forced labor and occupational health & safety. If left unaddressed, these risks could not only harm individuals but also
                      erode community trust in the project. KEWASIP must therefore integrate GBV prevention strategies, establish clear
                      reporting and response mechanisms, and enforce strict codes of conduct for all project personnel and contractors. To
                      mitigate these environmental and social risks, KEWASIP will implement comprehensive safeguards aligned with the
                      World Bank’s Environmental and Social Standards (ESS). A Process Framework will be prepared and will inform the
                      development of appropriate plans to guide land use planning and ensure that communities are actively involved in
                      decision-making. Stakeholder engagement will be prioritized through the implementation of the Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP), ensuring that IPs, VMGs, and other affected groups have a meaningful voice in project


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                         Page 8 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      planning and implementation. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will also be prepared ,
                      setting out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess and manage Project E&S risks and impacts. The
                      ESMF will include ESMP templates, a Labor Management Procedures (LMP), and a Security Management Plan (SMP).
                      To manage the risks of SEA and SH, Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment (SEA-SH) Prevention and Response
                      Plan will be developed and adopted before effective date and implemented throughout the project. A Grievance
                      Redress Mechanism (GRM) will also be established to provide affected communities with an accessible and culturally
                      appropriate platform to voice concerns and resolve disputes. On the environmental front, the project will conduct
                      detailed environmental and social assessments (ESAs) to guide reforestation, watershed management, and landscape
                      restoration efforts. Nature-based solutions will be prioritized to reduce soil erosion, improve groundwater recharge,
                      and enhance ecosystem resilience. The project will also ensure that tree species selection is appropriate for local
                      conditions to prevent biodiversity loss and ecosystem imbalances. To address social risks, KEWASIP will implement
                      structured benefit-sharing mechanisms that promote community ownership and equitable economic participation.
                      Compensation and livelihood restoration programs will be carefully designed to prevent economic displacement and
                      ensure that all affected groups receive appropriate support. Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA)
                      will be undertaken to examine E&S risks and impacts associated with new policies and integrated plans under
                      Component 1 of the Project. Additionally, KEWASIP will invest in capacity-building for implementing agencies and
                      local communities to strengthen risk management, governance structures, and monitoring processes.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                   Relevant

                      The project recognizes that meaningful and inclusive stakeholder engagement is essential to ensure that the voices of
                      affected communities, Indigenous Peoples (IPs), and Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs) are heard and



Public Disclosure
                      integrated into project planning and implementation. However, despite the emphasis on participation, several risks
                      and challenges need to be addressed to ensure equitable engagement, effective communication, and robust
                      grievance redress mechanisms. One of the major risks under ESS10 relates to the exclusion particularly of Indigenous
                      Peoples and VMGs residing in the targeted watersheds. Many of these groups have historically been disadvantaged in
                      decision-making processes and development projects, often facing barriers to participation due to remoteness,
                      cultural differences, and systemic marginalization. There is a risk that KEWASIP’s engagement processes may not be
                      fully inclusive or that consultations may not adhere to Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) principles. Without
                      appropriate outreach, culturally sensitive engagement strategies, and accessible participation mechanisms, these
                      communities may struggle to express their concerns, contribute to project design, or access project benefits. Another
                      critical challenge is ensuring meaningful consultation beyond one-time engagements. The KEWASIP’s activities
                      involve complex land-use changes, conservation measures, and restrictions on resource access, which require
                      ongoing dialogue and adaptive engagement rather than isolated consultations. There is a risk that consultations could
                      be perceived as procedural rather than substantive, leading to community dissatisfaction if decisions appear to have
                      been predetermined. Ensuring continuous and iterative stakeholder engagement throughout the project lifecycle is
                      necessary to build trust, manage expectations, and foster local ownership of project interventions. The risk of elite
                      capture within community engagement processes is also a significant concern. In many cases, local leadership
                      structures are not fully representative of all community members, and certain influential individuals or groups may
                      dominate discussions and decision-making. If not properly managed, KEWASIP’s stakeholder engagement efforts
                      could reinforce existing power imbalances, preventing equitable access to information, decision-making
                      opportunities, and project benefits. This could create resentment among marginalized groups, leading to conflicts
                      over resource allocation, benefit-sharing, and land-use restrictions. At the community level, Community-Based


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      Organizations (CBOs), will represent beneficiary communities and ensure participatory identification, preparation,
                      and implementation of restoration and livelihood sub-projects. Prioritization is on the inclusion of VMGs to enhance
                      their social & economic participation and equal benefitting. In addition to consultation risks, the Grievance Redress
                      Mechanism (GRM) presents another area of potential challenge. KEWASIP will establish a project-level GRM to
                      receive, process, and resolve grievances from affected individuals and communities. While this is an essential
                      safeguard, the effectiveness of the GRM will depend on its accessibility, cultural appropriateness, and responsiveness.
                      There is a risk that affected people may not be aware of the GRM, may lack trust in its impartiality, or may find it
                      difficult to navigate due to literacy barriers or fear of retaliation. Moreover, the GRM must be designed to handle
                      sensitive complaints, such as those related to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Gender-Based Violence (GBV),
                      in a manner that protects survivors’ confidentiality and ensures appropriate response mechanisms. If poorly designed
                      or underutilized, the GRM could fail to address community concerns, leading to escalating grievances, social unrest,
                      or reduced trust in project institutions. To mitigate these risks, KEWASIP has developed a comprehensive Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP) that outlines the strategies for inclusive, transparent, and culturally appropriate engagement.
                      The plan aims to ensure that all stakeholders, including IPs, VMGs, women, and other marginalized groups, have an
                      opportunity to participate in project discussions and decision-making. Specific measures include targeted outreach in
                      local languages, the use of participatory rural appraisal techniques, engagement through traditional leadership
                      structures, and ensuring that community consultations are gender-sensitive and inclusive of youth and persons with
                      disabilities. Additionally, KEWASIP is enhancing the GRM to ensure accessibility and responsiveness. The project will
                      establish multiple grievance reporting channels, including community grievance committees, anonymous reporting
                      mechanisms, and mobile-based complaint submission options. Special provisions will be made for handling SEA/GBV-
                      related grievances, including establishing safe spaces for reporting, referral pathways for survivors, and gender-




Public Disclosure
                      sensitive response teams. Awareness campaigns will be conducted to ensure that all community members
                      understand their rights, know how to file grievances, and feel confident in using the grievance mechanisms without
                      fear of retaliation. Capacity-building for project implementers and local institutions will also be critical in
                      strengthening stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanisms. KEWASIP will invest in training
                      government officials, county officers, and community representatives on best practices for participatory engagement,
                      conflict resolution, and grievance management. This will ensure that engagement processes are not only well-
                      structured but also effectively implemented to build trust, transparency, and accountability throughout the project.
                      Stakeholder consultations have been conducted to guide project preparation, design, and implementation. The
                      stakeholder consultations were conducted in an inclusive and culturally appropriate manner through key informant
                      interviews and focus group discussions including with County governments at Nyeri and Laikipia in the Upper Tana
                      region, Nakuru and Narok in the Mau Forest complex, as well as with Kenya Forest Service (KFS) Ecosystem
                      Conservators, National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), County Directors of Environment, Water
                      Resources Authority (WRA) Regional Officers, Kenya Water Towers Agency (KWTA) Regional Coordinators, Ewaso
                      Ngiro South Development Authority, Tana and Athi Rivers Development Authority, Community Forest Associations,
                      Water Resources Users Associations, local community conservation groups, indigenous communities, and other key
                      stakeholders.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      KEWASIP will engage multiple categories of workers, including community workers drawn from local populations,
                      direct workers employed by implementing agencies, contracted workers involved in technical assistance and capacity-
                      building activities, and primary supply workers responsible for delivering key project inputs such as drone technology


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      and surveillance equipment. Given this diverse workforce, KEWASIP will ensure strict adherence to ESS2 to uphold
                      fair labour practices, prevent exploitation, and promote safe and dignified working conditions. However, several risks
                      related to employment conditions, occupational health and safety (OHS), labour rights, and grievance redress
                      mechanisms must be carefully managed throughout project implementation. A primary concern under ESS2 is the risk
                      of inadequate employment conditions and labour rights violations, particularly among community workers and lower-
                      skilled labourers engaged in land rehabilitation and conservation activities. These workers, often engaged on short-
                      term or informal contracts, may face challenges such as low wages, delayed payments, lack of social protections, and
                      absence of collective bargaining opportunities. Without robust monitoring mechanisms, there is a risk that
                      community workers may be engaged under exploitative conditions, with limited access to employment benefits or
                      formal grievance mechanisms. Another significant challenge pertains to occupational health and safety (OHS) risks,
                      particularly for workers involved in land restoration, afforestation, and watershed rehabilitation activities. The project
                      involves activities such as tree planting, soil and water conservation, gully rehabilitation, and invasive species control,
                      all of which require physical labor under potentially hazardous conditions. Workers may be exposed to extreme
                      weather, sharp tools, heavy lifting, and hazardous chemicals used in invasive species and trees pests and diseases
                      management, increasing the risk of injuries and health complications. Without comprehensive safety protocols,
                      provision of protective equipment, and regular OHS training, these risks could compromise worker safety and well-
                      being. A critical risk under KEWASIP is the potential for child and forced labor, particularly in rural communities where
                      economic hardships may push vulnerable groups, including children, into informal and exploitative labor
                      arrangements. Given that many community workers will be engaged in remote, underserved areas, there is a risk that
                      underage labourers could be inadvertently recruited, violating both national labor laws and ESS2 principles. Similarly,
                      workers in primary supply chains, including those providing seedlings, construction materials, or technological inputs,




Public Disclosure
                      must be closely monitored to ensure ethical sourcing and prevent labor rights abuses. Strong due diligence measures,
                      regular labor inspections (in cooperation with Kenya's Ministry of Labor), and supplier screening protocols will be
                      essential to mitigate these risks. The lack of a dedicated Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for workers is another
                      area of concern. Without a well-structured, accessible, and confidential mechanism, workers may struggle to report
                      labor rights violations, workplace harassment, or safety concerns. This is particularly important for addressing gender-
                      based violence (GBV) and sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA/SH) risks, which are prevalent in projects involving rural
                      and informal labor. Women workers may face unequal pay, limited representation in decision-making, or risk of
                      harassment by supervisors or fellow workers. Establishing a separate GRM tailored for labor-related grievances will
                      help workers voice concerns without fear of retaliation. To mitigate these labor risks, KEWASIP has incorporated labor
                      management provisions aligned with ESS2, the World Bank’s Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines, and
                      national labor laws into the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and will implement the LMP to guide
                      labor management, as well as occupational and community health & safety. Additionally, contractors will develop
                      labor management plans that align with the Project LMP, as part of the overall set of construction management sub-
                      plans included in the ESMP. The Project Operational Manual (POM) will detail employment conditions, non-
                      discrimination policies, equal opportunity provisions, worker organization rights, child and forced labor prohibitions,
                      and a strict code of conduct for SEA/SH prevention. Additionally, the project will implement a robust labour
                      management system that includes clear contracts for all workers, fair wage structures, transparent recruitment
                      processes, and provisions for social security and workplace protections. A dedicated worker GRM will be established,
                      offering multiple reporting channels, including anonymous and confidential options, to address labour grievances
                      efficiently. KEWASIP will also invest in capacity-building initiatives to strengthen implementing agencies’ ability to
                      monitor labour conditions, enforce OHS standards, and prevent labour rights violations. Training will be provided on
                      safe working conditions, proper use of protective equipment, emergency response protocols, and ethical labour


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                       Page 11 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      recruitment. These measures will ensure that all workers engaged in the project operate under safe, fair, and legally
                      compliant conditions.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      The project’s activities focus on watershed restoration, landscape management, and conservation-based
                      interventions, all of which have implications for energy use, water consumption, waste generation, and pollution
                      control. Although the initial screening during project preparation did not identify activities with significant energy
                      demands, excessive water usage, or hazardous waste production, ongoing monitoring and assessment will be
                      required to proactively mitigate environmental risks and integrate sustainable resource management practices. A key
                      concern under ESS3 relates to the potential for increased water and raw material use in the implementation of
                      project interventions. KEWASIP involves reforestation, soil and water conservation, and watershed rehabilitation—all
                      of which require water-intensive processes such as seedling propagation, irrigation for newly planted vegetation, and
                      water retention structure development. In areas where water resources are already under stress due to climate
                      variability, prolonged droughts, or upstream water abstraction, there is a risk that the project’s water demands could
                      exacerbate competition for water resources between agricultural, domestic, and ecological needs. Furthermore,
                      interventions that involve construction of water storage facilities, check dams, and erosion control structures will
                      require the use of raw materials such as sand, stones, and cement, which must be sourced sustainably to avoid
                      contributing to land degradation, habitat destruction, or unsustainable extraction practices. Another environmental
                      challenge pertains to pollution prevention and waste management. Although the project does not anticipate
                      significant hazardous waste generation, some interventions—such as the removal of invasive species, tree pests and
                      diseases management, agroforestry development, and application of soil treatments—may produce organic and non-



Public Disclosure
                      organic waste that requires proper disposal. If invasive species such as Prosopis juliflora are mechanically or
                      chemically removed, biomass waste management strategies must be in place to avoid unintended ecological and
                      economic consequences, such as increasing fire risks or disrupting livestock grazing areas. Additionally, while
                      KEWASIP does not directly promote pesticide or fertilizer use, there is a possibility that community-led agricultural
                      intensification or agroforestry activities could lead to increased agrochemical application, posing risks of water
                      contamination and soil degradation if not properly regulated. Energy efficiency is another critical aspect of ESS3
                      compliance in KEWASIP. Although project interventions are not expected to be energy-intensive, certain activities—
                      such as remote sensing and drone surveillance for monitoring, irrigation system installation, and capacity-building
                      programs that require transportation and electronic equipment—may have indirect energy and carbon footprint
                      implications. The project must adopt energy-efficient technologies where possible, such as solar-powered monitoring
                      systems, fuel-efficient transport options, and climate-smart agricultural practices to minimize greenhouse gas (GHG)
                      emissions. Moreover, the adoption of nature-based solutions for carbon sequestration, land restoration, and erosion
                      control will help offset emissions and enhance long-term climate resilience. Climate change mitigation and adaptation
                      are core considerations under ESS3, particularly given that Kenya is highly vulnerable to extreme weather events such
                      as droughts, floods, and erratic rainfall patterns. The project will ensure that all interventions integrate climate
                      adaptation strategies, including the use of drought-resistant tree species, water-efficient irrigation techniques, and
                      soil conservation measures that enhance water retention. Furthermore, planned infrastructure and conservation
                      investments must be climate-proofed to withstand extreme weather events and future climate scenarios. KEWASIP’s
                      alignment with Kenya’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement will also be essential
                      in guiding climate-smart land-use practices that enhance carbon sequestration, reduce emissions, and support
                      sustainable livelihoods. To mitigate these risks, the Ministry of Environment will ensure that environmental and social


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                   Page 12 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      assessments (ESAs) are integrated into technical assistance (TA) outputs, guiding the adoption of climate mitigation
                      and adaptation measures in all project interventions. Resource efficiency and pollution prevention measures will be
                      included in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), ensuring that the project optimizes water and
                      energy use, minimizes waste generation, and implements pollution control measures in line with the requirements of
                      ESS3. In addition, the Project Operational Manual (POM) will include provisions for monitoring and reporting on
                      resource consumption, pollution control, and climate resilience efforts, ensuring continuous alignment with
                      environmental best practices and sustainability goals.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      KEWASIP presents multiple community health and safety risks, particularly in labor-intensive activities such as tree
                      planting, soil conservation, and invasive species management. Under the Environmental and Social Standard 4 (ESS4)
                      of the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), the project is required to identify, prevent, and
                      mitigate risks that could affect the safety, health, and well-being of communities and workers. These risks include
                      occupational hazards, chemical exposure, accidents in difficult terrains, natural disaster risks, and gender-based
                      violence (GBV) and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA/SH) risks. A key concern under ESS4 is the potential for
                      workplace injuries among community members involved in manual restoration work. Many of the targeted
                      watershed areas have steep slopes, eroded landscapes, and unstable terrain, which could increase the risk of falls,
                      landslides, and other physical injuries. Workers engaged in activities such as digging trenches, constructing check
                      dams and gabions, and carrying heavy materials face risks of musculoskeletal injuries, fatigue, and dehydration,
                      particularly in extreme weather conditions. If proper Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) measures are not
                      enforced, these risks could lead to serious accidents, reduced worker productivity, and increased community



Public Disclosure
                      grievances. Another significant hazard relates to the management of invasive species and tree pests, which in some
                      cases may involve the application of herbicides and chemical treatments. If proper chemical handling and safety
                      protocols are not followed, there is a risk of direct exposure to toxic substances, leading to respiratory issues, skin
                      irritations, and other health complications for workers and nearby community members. The improper disposal of
                      chemical containers and residues could also contaminate soil and water sources, affecting both biodiversity and
                      human health. The project’s interventions, such as revegetation, slope stabilization, and erosion control, aim to
                      enhance watershed resilience, but poorly executed restoration efforts could destabilize fragile soils, leading to
                      unintended landslides or flooding. The increased use of heavy machinery and infrastructure development may also
                      alter natural water flow, potentially exacerbating flood risks if drainage systems and sediment control structures are
                      not properly designed. Gender-based risks, including Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harassment
                      (SH), are another critical concern under ESS4. KEWASIP will involve both male and female community workers, many
                      of whom will be working in remote project sites with minimal supervision. In such environments, there is a
                      heightened risk of SEA/SH incidents, particularly if workers, contractors, or project personnel exploit vulnerable
                      groups. Women workers may face harassment, discrimination, or barriers to fair wages and employment
                      opportunities. Additionally, young women and girls in communities near project sites may be at risk of coercion or
                      exploitation if there are power imbalances between workers and local residents. To mitigate these risks, KEWASIP will
                      adopt a comprehensive Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that incorporates clear
                      Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) guidelines, ensuring that all community workers and project staff receive
                      proper training on workplace safety and risk management. The project will provide Personal Protective Equipment
                      (PPE), including gloves, helmets, boots, and safety harnesses, for all workers involved in hazardous activities.
                      Additionally, the safe handling, application, and disposal of herbicides and other chemicals will be governed by strict


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      chemical safety protocols, minimizing exposure risks to both workers and the surrounding environment. To enhance
                      disaster risk preparedness, the project will conduct site-specific risk assessments before restoration activities begin,
                      identifying high-risk areas and implementing erosion control measures accordingly. KEWASIP will also strengthen
                      early warning systems and community disaster response capacities, ensuring that local residents are trained in flood
                      and landslide preparedness measures. For SEA/SH and GBV risks, the project will enforce a strict Code of Conduct for
                      all workers, contractors, and implementing partners, outlining zero-tolerance policies for harassment and abuse. A
                      separate Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for workers will be established to provide confidential reporting
                      channels and survivor-centered response measures, including safe spaces for reporting, access to psychosocial
                      support, and legal assistance. Training programs will be conducted to raise awareness among workers and
                      community members about their rights, reporting procedures, and available support services. In addition, E&S
                      assessments to be conducted at the sub-project level will identify specific community health and safety risks relevant
                      to the intervention, and their mitigation measures.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      A key concern is the potential restriction of access to land and natural resources due to KEWASIP’s conservation and
                      watershed restoration activities. Some of the targeted watersheds include Indigenous Peoples (IPs) and Vulnerable
                      and Marginalized Groups (VMGs) who rely on forestlands, communal rangelands, and riparian areas for their
                      livelihoods. Project interventions such as afforestation, reforestation of degraded parts of gazetted forests, green
                      corridor establishment, and watershed protection could limit traditional grazing areas, restrict firewood collection,
                      and prevent access to culturally significant sites. Without proper mitigation, these restrictions could exacerbate
                      poverty, disrupt local economies, and create tensions between project implementers and affected communities.



Public Disclosure
                      Another critical risk relates to the displacement of communities and the economic impacts on livelihoods. While
                      KEWASIP does not anticipate large-scale physical displacement, the economic displacement of farmers, pastoralists,
                      and small-scale resource users is a significant concern. For example, farmers practicing traditional shifting cultivation,
                      herders using seasonal grazing corridors, and fisherfolk dependent on riparian zones may face new regulations or
                      restrictions that alter their access to essential resources. In addition, benefit-sharing mechanisms for investments on
                      community land must be designed equitably to prevent elite capture or the exclusion of marginalized groups from
                      project benefits. To manage these risks, KEWASIP is undertaking a comprehensive Environmental and Social
                      Assessment (ESA), which includes the development of a Process Framework to guide the formulation of key
                      mitigation plans. These include a Resettlement Plan, Livelihood Restoration Plan, Indigenous Peoples Plan, and
                      Benefit-Sharing Agreements, tailored to address the specific needs of affected communities. These plans will be
                      implemented to mitigate negative impacts on local communities’ livelihoods, living standards, and cultural practices,
                      ensuring that affected populations receive adequate compensation, alternative livelihood options, and continued
                      access to critical resources. Another essential safeguard under ESS5 is the application of the Project Environmental
                      and Social Screening Tool for all interventions. This screening process will identify potential risks related to land
                      tenure conflicts, involuntary resettlement, and access restrictions, ensuring that any technical assistance (TA)
                      activities integrate appropriate mitigation measures. The Terms of Reference (TORs) for TA activities will incorporate
                      detailed risk assessments and specific Environmental and Social (E&S) mitigation actions to minimize unintended
                      consequences. The project also recognizes the need for strong stakeholder engagement and grievance redress
                      mechanisms to ensure that affected communities can voice concerns, negotiate fair compensation, and seek
                      resolution for land-related grievances. A Project Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be established to handle




                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 14 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      land-related complaints transparently and equitably, with particular attention to Indigenous Peoples, VMGs, and
                      other marginalized groups.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      Given the landscape-scale restoration and watershed management interventions planned under KEWASIP, the
                      project has the potential to enhance biodiversity and ecosystem services while also posing risks related to habitat
                      modification, species composition changes, and invasive species management if not well planned. Sub-component 2b
                      activities will be undertaken in selected gazetted forests which are important biodiversity conservation areas. Some
                      of these forests are critical habitats for endemic and/or threatened species listed on the IUCN Red List of Threatened
                      Species. For example, the Nyambene Hills water tower has atleast ten endemic plant species, while the Shimba Hills
                      water tower has atleast 22 avian species endemic to the coastal region. The initial environmental screening did not
                      identify direct interventions that pose significant adverse risks to biodiversity. However, given that many of the
                      targeted watersheds are home to diverse flora and fauna, project activities such as afforestation, soil conservation,
                      and water retention infrastructure development could indirectly affect local biodiversity and ecosystem balance if not
                      managed appropriately. Afforestation and reforestation efforts, if not carefully designed, could disrupt existing
                      habitats and alter local biodiversity. The introduction of non-native or fast-growing tree species could potentially
                      outcompete indigenous vegetation, reducing habitat suitability for certain wildlife species. Restoration activities in
                      gazetted forests and riparian areas need to avoid over-intervention that may lead to unintended disturbances in
                      sensitive ecosystems. For example, heavy machinery use in forest restoration efforts could disrupt fragile soils,
                      disturb nesting sites, or alter microhabitats critical for certain species. The presence of invasive plant species, such as



Public Disclosure
                      Prosopis juliflora and Lantana camara, in some of the project locations requires systematic removal and
                      management. If not well-coordinated, removal efforts could lead to rapid recolonization, further degrading local
                      ecosystems. Additionally, mechanical removal without proper soil rehabilitation could exacerbate erosion risks and
                      reduce soil fertility, negatively impacting native vegetation recovery. The project’s investments in water retention
                      structures, irrigation schemes, and riparian buffer restoration could inadvertently impact natural hydrological flows,
                      affecting wetland ecosystems and aquatic biodiversity. The construction of water harvesting structures, check dams,
                      and flood management systems must ensure that natural aquatic habitats are not fragmented and that sediment
                      transport is not disrupted, which could otherwise affect fish populations and other aquatic species. To ensure
                      biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of natural resources, KEWASIP will integrate biodiversity-
                      friendly project design, species conservation measures, and ecosystem-based management approaches in line with
                      ESS6. Environmental and social screening tools, including those that assess biodiversity risks, will be developed and
                      implemented to identify and exclude activities that may have significant adverse impacts on local biodiversity. An
                      Exclusion List will be provided in the Project’s ESMF that precludes activities that have the potential to cause any
                      significant loss or degradation of critical natural habitats, whether directly or indirectly, or which would lead to
                      adverse impacts on natural habitats. The selection of tree species for afforestation and reforestation efforts will
                      prioritize native and site-adapted species that align with natural ecosystem functions. To enhance biodiversity,
                      reforestation efforts will mimic natural forest structures rather than relying on monoculture plantations, reducing
                      risks of habitat simplification and lowered ecological resilience. Post-restoration monitoring systems will be
                      established to track species recovery, habitat quality, and vegetation succession over time. A structured removal and
                      restoration plan will be developed for invasive species management, combining mechanical removal, biological
                      control, and community-based land stewardship to prevent reinvasion and secondary ecological degradation.


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                       Page 15 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      Community engagement in invasive species control will be promoted through livelihood programs that repurpose
                      removed biomass for productive uses such as biochar production, fodder, or sustainable fuelwood alternatives. The
                      project will adopt nature-based solutions for flood and erosion control, ensuring that riparian buffer zones are
                      maintained with diverse, multi-layered vegetation to support aquatic ecosystem health. Water resource planning will
                      integrate ecological flow assessments to ensure that wetland habitats, fish populations, and downstream users are
                      not adversely affected by hydrological modifications. PIU-based E&S officers will be responsible for biodiversity
                      monitoring and compliance tracking, ensuring that all restoration and land management activities align with ESS6
                      objectives. The project will integrate GIS-based ecological monitoring, combining remote sensing and community-
                      based biodiversity assessments to track the effectiveness of conservation measures and adapt interventions where
                      necessary.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                               Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      A primary risk under ESS7 is the lack of culturally appropriate consultation mechanisms and inclusive decision-making
                      processes. Given that many IPs and VMGs in Kenya have historically faced exclusion from development planning and
                      resource governance, KEWASIP must ensure that they are meaningfully engaged from the outset. Failure to do so
                      could result in community resistance, mistrust, and social tensions, particularly if interventions alter traditional land-
                      use patterns, disrupt access to sacred sites, or impose conservation restrictions without consent. Another significant
                      concern is the risk of non-compliance with Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) for activities that may affect the
                      land, resources, and cultural heritage of Indigenous communities. If project interventions involve land reclassification,
                      restrictions on access to natural resources, or relocation of livelihoods, the absence of a well-defined FPIC process



Public Disclosure
                      could lead to disputes, legal challenges, or conflicts between project implementers and affected communities.
                      Economic and social risks also arise from potential restrictions on traditional livelihoods, particularly for pastoralist,
                      forest-dependent, and riverine communities that rely on communal land and natural ecosystems for sustenance.
                      KEWASIP’s conservation and watershed management initiatives could reduce grazing land availability, limit access to
                      water sources, or disrupt traditional farming and fishing practices, directly impacting food security, income sources,
                      and community resilience. Additionally, social exclusion and gender disparities remain key risks, particularly for
                      women, youth, and marginalized sub-groups within IPs and VMGs. Historically, Indigenous women have had limited
                      representation in decision-making structures, making it essential that KEWASIP adopts affirmative action measures to
                      promote inclusive participation, equitable benefit-sharing, and targeted support for Indigenous women’s economic
                      empowerment. To address these risks, KEWASIP will implement a comprehensive Process Framework that
                      incorporates key provisions under ESS7, ensuring that VMGs and Indigenous communities are adequately consulted,
                      protected, and included in project benefits. The project will develop and institutionalize FPIC mechanisms to ensure
                      that any activity affecting IPs and VMGs’ rights, resources, or livelihoods is preceded by open, transparent, and
                      participatory decision-making. KEWASIP will establish community-led consultation platforms, leveraging Indigenous
                      governance structures, local elders, and cultural representatives to facilitate meaningful dialogue and consent-based
                      decision-making. VMGs will be actively involved in the design, implementation, and monitoring of conservation and
                      watershed management plans, ensuring that their traditional ecological knowledge is integrated into landscape
                      restoration efforts. Participatory Forest Management Plans (PFMPs) and Community Watershed Action Plans will
                      incorporate customary land-use practices and Indigenous conservation approaches. KEWASIP will establish clear
                      guidelines for compensation, benefit distribution, and alternative livelihood programs, ensuring that economic
                      displacement risks are mitigated through sustainable, culturally appropriate income-generation activities. A Benefit-


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 16 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      Sharing Framework will be developed to ensure that Indigenous communities equitably access project-related
                      economic opportunities, including community-led restoration initiatives, ecotourism ventures, and Payment for
                      Ecosystem Services (PES) schemes. A dedicated GRM for IPs and VMGs will be established, integrating traditional
                      dispute resolution mechanisms, local mediation processes, and culturally sensitive grievance-handling protocols. The
                      project's SEP will include customized outreach strategies, ensuring that Indigenous languages, communication
                      preferences, and socio-political contexts are fully considered. KEWASIP will implement affirmative action policies to
                      enhance Indigenous women’s leadership in decision-making processes, ensuring their participation in land
                      governance, restoration initiatives, and economic development programs. Special emphasis will be placed on youth
                      engagement, capacity-building for VMG-led enterprises, and access to vocational training tailored to Indigenous
                      knowledge systems and climate-smart livelihoods.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      One of the key risks associated with KEWASIP is the potential interference with cultural heritage resources due to
                      land restoration and conservation activities. Many Indigenous Peoples and local communities rely on certain sites for
                      traditional ceremonies, initiation rites, spiritual practices, and cultural identity preservation. For instance, shrines,
                      circumcision sites, sacred forests, and burial grounds could be inadvertently impacted if they are not properly
                      identified and safeguarded during project implementation. Additionally, the project’s civil works, afforestation, and
                      reforestation activities may lead to the displacement or alteration of cultural landscapes, affecting long-standing
                      traditions and local customs. Communities that utilise medicinal plants, practice seasonal grazing, traditional farming,
                      or spiritual rituals linked to specific landforms may experience disruptions if project activities do not integrate their
                      cultural considerations into the planning process. To address these risks, KEWASIP will integrate cultural heritage



Public Disclosure
                      preservation into project planning and implementation, ensuring that cultural values and traditional practices are
                      respected, protected, and promoted. A cultural heritage screening process will be integrated into the project’s
                      Environmental and Social Screening Tool, ensuring that all culturally significant sites are mapped and excluded from
                      project interventions. Engagement with local elders, Indigenous Peoples’ representatives, cultural experts, and
                      archaeologists will be conducted to document and verify sacred sites, burial grounds, and intangible heritage
                      resources before activities commence. A participatory approach will be adopted to ensure that Indigenous and local
                      communities are actively consulted on how project activities may affect their cultural heritage. The project will
                      facilitate culturally appropriate consultation mechanisms to determine the extent of significance attached to project
                      areas and develop co-designed solutions to mitigate adverse impacts. Special attention will be given to customary
                      laws, traditional governance structures, and Indigenous knowledge systems in managing and protecting cultural sites.
                      KEWASIP will adopt and enforce World Bank-compliant Chance Find procedures, ensuring that all archaeological and
                      cultural discoveries made during project activities are immediately reported, assessed, and preserved. Project
                      contractors and workers will be trained on the Chance Find procedures, equipping them with the necessary protocols
                      to follow when encountering artifacts, fossils, or historical structures. Collaboration with Kenya’s National Museums
                      and local heritage authorities will be established to ensure compliance with national cultural heritage protection
                      laws.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      Not relevant to the project




                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                     Page 17 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                       No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           No
                       Not envisaged at the moment


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                              No
                       Not envisaged

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     ESF instruments will be prepared in three phases: those required before project appraisal, ny project effectiveness and
                     those to be developed during project implementation.

                     (1) Instruments to be Prepared by Project Appraisal



Public Disclosure
                     Three instruments have been prepared to establish the framework for stakeholder engagement, define the project’s
                     environmental and social obligations and set out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess and address
                     Project E&S risks and impacts:

                     (a) Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): This document outlines the timing, methods, and scope of stakeholder
                     engagement throughout the project’s lifecycle, ensuring meaningful participation by all relevant stakeholders. The SEP
                     will distinguish between project-affected persons, interested parties, and vulnerable groups, detailing how their
                     concerns will be considered in decision-making. The plan is developed in agreement between the Government of Kenya
                     and the World Bank and will guide consultations, information dissemination, and grievance redress mechanisms.

                     (b) Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP): The ESCP sets out the material measures and actions that the
                     Government of Kenya must undertake to comply with environmental and social requirements. It defines specific
                     obligations, implementation timeframes, and monitoring responsibilities, ensuring that all mitigation measures are
                     integrated into project operations. The ESCP serves as a legally binding commitment between the government of Kenya
                     and the World Bank, ensuring that environmental and social risk management is prioritized.

                     C) Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): This framework establishes the principles, rules,
                     guidelines, and procedures for assessing environmental and social risks and impacts once specific sites and sub-projects
                     are identified. The ESMF provides a structured approach for screening, assessing, and mitigating risks, ensuring
                     compliance with national and international environmental and social standards. It includes Labor Management



                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
                               The World Bank
                               Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     Procedures (LMP) and a Security Management Plan (SMP) that outlines strategies, procedures, and measures to
                     manage and mitigate security risks related to the project.

                     (2) To be completed by project effectiveness

                     An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) that includes, (i) developing a process framework to address E&S risks
                     and impacts related to restrictions on access to natural resources in legally designated parks and gazette forests which
                     will inform the development of appropriate management plans which may include a Resettlement Plan, Livelihood
                     Restoration Plan, Indigenous Peoples Plan, and/or Benefit Sharing Plan/Agreement; (ii) an evaluation of the institutional
                     frameworks for the KFS and KWS for recommendations on strengthening their codes of conduct, aligned with Good
                     Practice Notes (GPN) on the use of armed security and other internationally accepted practices; (iii) a social conflict
                     analysis to assess the extent to which project activities might exacerbate existing tensions and inequalities or be
                     affected by ongoing conflicts; (iv) an E&S technical capacities and systems assessment of implementing entities to
                     enhance management and sustainability measures; (v) a review of the existing Grievance Redress Mechanism of
                     implementing entities for enhancement; and (vi) Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment (SEA-SH) Prevention and
                     Response Plan.

                     3) Instruments to be Prepared, Reviewed, Approved, and Disclosed During Project Implementation

                     Once project implementation begins, additional instruments will be developed to address site-specific risks and ensure
                     that all project interventions comply with environmental and social requirements. The specific additional instruments




Public Disclosure
                     to be developed will be determined by the outcome of the Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA), anticipated to
                     be completed by project effectiveness.
                     Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to examine E&S risks and impacts associated with plans/policies
                     and regulatory frameworks under Component 1 of the Project;
                     Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) as
                     established by the outcome of screening defined in the ESMF.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Hisham Mohammed Salih Osman           Title:          Senior Environmental Engineer
                                             Mohammed

                      Email:                 hosman1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Victor Vazquez Alvarez                Job Title:      Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                 vvazquez@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                Hisham Mohammed Salih Osman Mohammed, Victor Vazquez Alvarez

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:       Aggrey Ochieng Kwadha

                     ADM Social Specialist:              Raymond Simon Maina Kirwa




Public Disclosure




                    Mar 21, 2025                                                                                        Page 20 of 20
