Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                              Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 05/08/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04948




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jun 05, 2025                                                                                         Page 1 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510359                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       EAP Water MPA                2026

                     Operation Name            Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA)

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Philippines               Philippines                              EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC        Water


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Department of             Department of Public Works and           07-Jul-2025                  31-Oct-2025
                     Finance                   Highways (DPWH), Department of the
                                               Interior and Local Government (DILG)

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost




Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     21-Apr-2025               293,965,221.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to safely managed water supply and sanitation services
                     and improve the performance of water service providers in selected areas of the Philippines.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The operation is a multi-phase program approach (MPA) whose development objective is to support participating EAP
                     countries in improving their water security and resilience to climate risks. Phase 1 of the MPA includes the Philippines
                     Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA). The project development objectives, results
                     indicators, and activities are aligned with those of the MPA and will contribute to the expected outcomes under the
                     MPA. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is “to increase access to safely managed water supply and
                     sanitation services and improve the performance of water service providers in selected areas of the Philippines.”


                    Jun 05, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                     Component 1. Infrastructure Investments for Safe Water Supply Services (US$224.91 million, of which US$213.32
                     million IBRD). This Component aims to increase access to safely managed water supply services through infrastructure
                     projects, including construction and/or rehabilitation of complete water supply systems, from source development to
                     household connections. Subcomponent 1a. Water supply infrastructure investments in the Loboc Cluster in Bohol
                     Province This subcomponent will address the water scarcity and worsening quality that is particularly felt in the Loboc
                     Cluster. Specifically, it will support (a) the development of a bulk water supply system sourced from the Loboc River
                     with a capacity of 60,000 cubic meters/day; and (b) the rehabilitation, upgrading, and expansion of existing water
                     distribution systems. Subcomponent 1b. Water supply infrastructure investments in Siargao Island in Surigao del Norte
                     Province This subcomponent will aim to provide safe and reliable water supply for Siargao Island residents and tourists
                     by developing and enhancing the island’s water infrastructure. The focus will be on increasing the efficiencies of current
                     water systems through NRW reduction and developing new sources to meet current and future demand. It will support
                     58 barangays in eight municipalities. Subcomponent 1c. Water supply infrastructure investments in Jolo and adjacent
                     barangays in two municipalities in Sulu Province This subcomponent will aim to rehabilitate and upgrade the entire
                     water supply system in the project areas, which are dilapidated and service only 35 percent of the original service area.
                     The objective is to enhance water services' reliability, safety, and resilience to meet current and future water demand.
                     To this end, this subcomponent will support: (a) upgrading, protecting, and treating spring sources to provide 18,000
                     cubic meters per day of reliable and safe water supply up to 2040; (b) total replacement of the 56-kilometer water
                     distribution network; (c) construction of four new concrete storage tanks; and (d) installation of around 12,378
                     household connections Component 2. Infrastructure Investments for Safe Sanitation and WASH Services (US$13.35
                     million, of which US$12.76 million IBRD). This Component aims to expand access to safe sanitation and inclusive WASH
                     services through investments in sanitation infrastructure such as for fecal sludge management (FSM) and the




Public Disclosure
                     construction of WASH facilities in schools and public spaces. Subcomponent 2a. Sanitation and WASH in Bohol. This
                     subcomponent will finance the construction of new WASH facilities in 53 public schools, 43 daycare centers, and 69
                     health centers, some of which also function as evacuation centers during typhoons and other disasters. Related to
                     sanitation, one FSM plant in Bohol is operating but underutilized and another one is planned; their total capacities are
                     sufficient to address the FSM needs of the three most urbanized and populated city/municipalities – Tagbilaran City,
                     Dauis, and Panglao. A TA under Component 3 on Institutional Reforms and Capacity Building will be provided to
                     complement this infrastructure. This TA will focus on developing and implementing a regular FSM program requiring
                     massive community and LGU engagement. The TA will also promote proper hygiene practices. Subcomponent 2b.
                     Sanitation and WASH in Siargao, Surigao del Norte This subcomponent aims to meet the island's FSM needs, given the
                     prevalence of improperly constructed septic tanks and the absence of a sewerage system. The infrastructure and
                     equipment to be constructed will support regular septic tank emptying services throughout Siargao Island. WASH
                     facilities will also be constructed in schools and other institutions. Subcomponent 2c. Sanitation and WASH in Jolo, Sulu
                     This subcomponent will finance the construction of new WASH facilities in 42 public schools, 8 daycare centers, and 3
                     social welfare centers, some of which also function as evacuation centers during typhoons and other disasters. A TA will
                     also be provided under Component 3 to prepare the municipality for a regular septic tank emptying program and
                     promote proper hygiene behavior and practices. Component 3. Institutional Reforms and Capacity Building (US$13.38
                     million IBRD). This Component aims to enhance the efficiency and sustainability of WSS services by supporting
                     fundamental institutional reforms and capacity-building of provinces, LGUs, and WSPs. The WSPs will benefit from
                     onsite practical trainings on leadership and governance, technical and commercial operations, financial management,
                     and project management. Component 4. Project Management and Technical Assistance (US$37.23 million IBRD). This
                     Component will support effective project implementation through support to project management and technical
                     assistance, ensuring compliance with World Bank policies while advancing long-term sanitation, water resource


                    Jun 05, 2025                                                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                     management, and financing strategies. Subcomponent 4a Project Management This subcomponent will finance project
                     management costs for the DPWH and DILG. Eligible activities will include consulting and non-consulting services,
                     training, and relevant operating expenses required to implement the project following the World Bank policy and
                     guidelines. Subcomponent 4b. Technical Assistance (TA). This subcomponent will finance TA aimed at enhancing
                     sustainable water and sanitation management. TA under this component will include consulting work that will support,
                     among others, the development of long-term master plans on sanitation and/or sewerage; implementation of pilot
                     sanitation demonstration projects; implementation of an FSM program; conduct of education campaigns on sanitation
                     and hygiene; development of watershed management programs; comprehensive water resources and energy
                     assessments; and other related work in the project areas. It will also include the preparation of feasibility studies to
                     create a pipeline of WSS projects in priority areas. Subcomponent 4b is a verified MFD-e. This will come from conducting
                     feasibility studies such as a water revolving fund for creditworthy Water Districts, other credit enhancements, and PPP
                     arrangements in close coordination with IFC and MIGA. Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component
                     (US$0 million). This zero-cost component will allow the GoP to quickly access project funds in response to an eligible
                     disaster, emergency, or crisis. It will enable rapid reallocation of uncommitted project funds to address urgent needs
                     during a natural disaster or crisis (including public health-related emergencies). A declaration of a state of calamity by a
                     qualified national or subnational authority, under applicable laws, could serve as a possible trigger to activate this
                     component.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The proposed project in Philippines is first phase of the proposed Multi Phase Approach (MPA), that aims to improve



Public Disclosure
                     water security and resilience to climate risks. The next phases of MPA are planned to be implemented in Mangolia,
                     Indonesia, Papua New Guinea in a sequential and simultaneous manner over a period next 10 years. The project area
                     and proposed interventions in these countries are unknown at this stage.

                     The Philippines phase of the project is proposed to be implemented in Loboc cluster in Bohol province, Siargao island in
                     Surigao del Norte Province and Jolo in Sulu Province. The project will be socially significant as it increases water and
                     sanitation services which leads to better human and economic development outcomes. While Philippines is not
                     categorized as an FCV country, sub-regional conflict exists in some areas of Mindanao- Surigao and Sulu have conflict-
                     affectations with presence of the New People's Army of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP-NPA) and some
                     elements of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and Moro National Liberation Front.

                     Regarding environmental settings, the project provinces have several natural features with ecological importance. Bohol
                     is renowned for its coral reefs and unique geological formations, such as Chocolate Hills in Carmen, featuring over 1,200
                     symmetrical mounds that turn cocoa-brown in the dry season. The province is also home to Tarsier sanctuary, a large
                     forest area dedicated to protecting the endangered tarsiers, small nocturnal primates. Siargao, known as the surfing
                     capital of the Philippines, boasts long sandy beaches, natural caves, and impressive rock formations. Sulu does not have
                     any officially designated protected areas while it has started its campaign on eco-tourism for the province.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project in Philippines will be implemented by the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), who has
                     substantial knowledge and experience of the World Bank's ESF. Its track record include implementing World Bank-
                     financed projects, such as the Metro Manila Flood Management Project (P153814), Philippines Seismic Risk Reduction

                    Jun 05, 2025                                                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                     and Resilience Project (P171419) under safeguards regime and Mindanao Transport Connectivity Improvement Project
                     (P177017) under ESF . The department has demonstrated its expertise and capability to manage site-specific risks and
                     impacts, as evidenced by the establishment of the Environment and Social Safeguards Department (ESSD). The ESSD
                     ensures compliance with safeguards requirements through diligent implementation, review, and reporting processes. It
                     operates in accordance with a comprehensive Social and Environment Management System (SEMS), which provides the
                     basis for understanding and applying safeguards principles and executing the Environmental and Social Management
                     Framework (ESMF).

                     The Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG), the other project implementing agency's E&S capacity is low
                     given that the agency doesn't have any experience implementing World Bank financed projects. However, for this
                     project, the role and activities to be undertaken by the DILG is limited to capacity building of local government units
                     (LGU's) including support for policy making related to water supply and sanitation. Given this, there is a need for the
                     project to provide DILG with the necessary ESF capacity development activities which may include ESF orientation and
                     deep dive into some of the relevant standards.

                     The capacity of borrowers in the other phases of the MPA will be assessed as and when the project contours in these
                     phases and implementing agencies are identified.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial




Public Disclosure
                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial
                     Since, the project areas and its proposed interventions are not known for other phases of the MPA, this sections
                     discusses risks related to Philippines Phase of the project only. The risks in other phases will be assessed when the
                     scope of MPA is identified. The Philippines phase of the MPA, envisages developing water sources,
                     upgrading/constructing water transmission and distribution systems and provision of sanitation facilities (septage
                     treatment, WASH in schools and public areas). While the operational phase of the project would have several
                     benefits, anticipated environmental impacts and risks of the project include: (a) possible impacts on natural habitats
                     in case of new surface source development or land subsidence or saline water intrusion due to over extraction of
                     groundwater; (b) cumulative impacts of water use on communities; (c) competing water demand and riparian issues;
                     (d) source contamination due to construction activities affecting health and safety of downstream riparians; (e)
                     possible forest land diversion and impacts on bio-diversity for laying transmission mains or construction of storage
                     reservoirs at elevation; (f) OHS risks on community during construction of distribution network; (g) air/water/soil
                     pollution due to the civil works including debris disposal; (h) impacts due to sighting of septage treatment facilities
                     and operation stage impacts such as odor and quality of effluents; and (i) contamination of ground and/or surface
                     water due to improperly designed facilities, etc. During the implementation similar civil works in the past in these
                     provinces, mitigation measures for most of these impacts were integrated into the construction contracts. In addition,
                     DPWH has demonstrated capacity to manage and address such impacts. However, the civil works in or around the
                     protected areas and/or near pristine water sources could cause significant impacts. Considering this, the
                     environmental risk is rated as “Substantial” at PCN.




                    Jun 05, 2025                                                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                                                                                                                                  Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project will have significant positive impact for poor and vulnerable households and communities by providing
                     access to affordable and clean water supply and sanitation facilities. Increased access to water would positively
                     impact women and girls increasing time for productive activities, providing safe and sanitary sanitation facilities.
                     Given the nature and context of the project which is water provision and civil works, key identified risks include (i)
                     land acquisition and road right of way for the siting of the facilities such as bulk water supply reservoirs, treatment
                     plant, intake tanks, as well as laying of pipes, which may involve servitude/ easement restrictions (ii) community
                     health and safety due to potential increase of waste water, water contamination and disruption of services during
                     civil works, and traffic risks due to use of heavy equipment and excavation works during pipe laying, and (iii) equity
                     issues in the use of water resources or restrictions on benefitting from ecosystem services especially for communities
                     where the water is sourced. Labor influx and its impact on workers and communities are not expected as per DPWH
                     experience, between 40-60 workers per site is needed with 80 percent of the laborers sourced from the community
                     or locality. Workers camp will be set-up hosting 5-10 workers. Occupational health and safety issues include security
                     of workers, exposure to natural hazards such as floods and extreme weather events (heavy rainfall and extreme
                     heat). Inclusion of vulnerable and marginalized groups is crucial, the Project will need to take into consideration
                     universal access principles in the design of WASH facilities to cater to the specific needs of persons with limited
                     mobility and gender considerations. Capacity building activities will need to ensure that women and IPs are provided
                     spaces and opportunities to participate and lead.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage



Public Disclosure
                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      ESS 1 is relevant to the project. Since, only feasibility reports will be available for the sub-projects during the
                      preparation stage and detailed designs will be prepared during implementation it is proposed to prepare ESCP and
                      ESMF by appraisal, that provides screening criteria and guidance for site-specific ESIAs and ESMPs for the sub-
                      projects. The ESMF will include standard ESMPs, exclusion list, Environmental and Social Codes of Practice (ESCOPs)
                      and nature based solutions to mitigate the impacts; and Community Health and Safety Plans where necessary.
                      Associated facilities such as approach roads will be recognized for assessment under ESMF. The ESMF will include
                      M&E mechanisms to capture lessons learned in the first phase of the MPA, so that these can be integrated in the next
                      phases of the MPA. In addition, ESIAs for projects implemented in the first year, will be prepared before appraisal.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      ESS 10 is relevant. Affected parties include communities where the water supply is sourced, adjacent communities
                      (including downstream) and private companies benefitting from ecosystem services, local government units and their
                      water utilities offices, and households, public institutions and private businesses that will be affected by the civil
                      works. Vulnerable and disadvantaged groups comprise children, persons with disabilities (PWDs), and IPs. A
                      stakeholder analysis will be prepared to identify stakeholders’ project-related needs and interests. Meaningful
                      engagement with affected parties and stakeholders will be undertaken including understanding of the political
                      economy and dynamics to ensure that risks and impacts are identified, avoided, and or mitigated. A project-wide SEP


                    Jun 05, 2025                                                                                                    Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                      will be developed before the appraisal that will outline activities on the conduct of public dialogues, and will include a
                      grievance redress mechanism (GRM) accessible by the public.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS 2 is relevant. According to DPWH the Project will employ between 40-60 laborers, 80-85 percent of whom will be
                      recruited from local communities. Thus, no labor influx is expected, however, a small workers camp ("Bunk houses")
                      will still be needed to accommodate the remaining 15 percent of skilled workers. It is anticipated that the majority
                      will fall under contracted workers, some direct workers, and some primary supply workers. Child labor is a potential
                      risk for this project especially in rural communities and can be used as haulers of construction materials. The Labor
                      Management Procedure shall be prepared as part of the ESMF before the project appraisal. The LMP will outline the
                      policies and procedures on OHS, labor GRM, working conditions and prevention of child labor, forced labor, SEAH/SH
                      and GBV. Security management plan will be prepared for project sites located in conflict-affected areas.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant as the project may generate significant risks associated with the civil works that generates noise, dust
                      and emissions. The ESMF will cover pollution prevention, and waste management with screening addressing the risks
                      on pollutant release, waste generation, ACM, community impact, and measures for improving efficient consumption
                      of energy, water and raw materials, as well as other resources. Potential restrictions to key ecosystem services like
                      access to water for livelihood and cultural aspects is also possible. Mitigations will be proposed during the
                      assessment, the ESIA/ESMP will evaluate civil works' risks and mitigation in line with ESS3 requirements, including




Public Disclosure
                      raw materials, water use, air pollution, hazardous materials, and waste. Depending on proposed investments and
                      treatment capacity, the significance and need for GHG accounting will be considered. The technical design will
                      incorporate good practices to reduce or mitigate the emission of greenhouse gases.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      ESS 4 is relevant. Civil works involving water systems and distribution lines/pipes pose significant health and safety
                      risks to communities. Foremost to this is the disruption of water supply and possible contamination of water brought
                      about by the civil works. Construction and excavation activities also present safety risks to communities including
                      traffic accidents, air/noise/water pollution. Increasing water access also translates to an increase of waste water and
                      sanitation issues demanding safe sewage and septage management. A traffic management plan will be included in
                      the ESMF. Moderate GBV and SEAH/SH risks stem from presence of male workers in rural and isolated communities
                      and select-schools. GBV and SEA/SH orientation among workers shall be included in the LMP, while community-level
                      mechanisms shall be tapped by the project to mitigate this risk. The project shall apply universal access and design
                      principles, in a manner financially and technically feasible.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                    Relevant

                      ESS 5 is relevant. Land acquisition is envisaged to be undertaken by local government units (LGUs e.g. municipal and
                      or provincial). While some of these lands are owned by the LGUs, informal settlers and or holder's of temporary use
                      of rights to the land may be affected. In addition, land acquisition for the approach roads of various water facilities is
                      also possible. Pipe laying works may also impact households, schools and business establishment including vendors.
                      With this, the Borrower will prepare a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework as part of the ESMF to guide


                    Jun 05, 2025                                                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                      LGUs in preparing and implementing site specific Resettlement Action Plan prior to the initiation of sub-project
                      activities. RAPs will cover land acquisition, resettlement and economic displacement and a GRM. If temporary
                      displacement of street vendors is unavoidable, the requirement under ESS5 is to consult the affected parties and
                      come up with alternative locations or livelihood support.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The proposed project provinces have Protected Areas (PA) of ecological significance and some civil works may be
                      located in these areas. Hence, impacts on terrestrial and/or aquatic ecosystems is anticipated. IBAT screening reflects
                      about 23 PAs and 9 key biodiversity areas (KBA) of terrestrial ecology in the project area. ESS6 hence is relevant for
                      the project and exclusion criteria will be included in the ESMF. Based on the available information and initial
                      screening at PCN, some project areas are close to PAs, requiring Protected Area Management Board (PAMB)
                      clearance. The preparation activities of the project will evaluate these aspects, especially for source development and
                      alignment of water transmission mains. Given this, the bio-diversity aspects and the associated impacts will be
                      assessed as part of the E&S Screening and ESIAs for specific investments including cumulative impacts on biodiversity,
                      habitat fragmentation, water quality degradation, erosion, deforestation, etc.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                              Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      As per information gathered as of this stage, no IP ancestral domains nor communities with IP population will be




Public Disclosure
                      affected. However, it is worth noting that IP households are present in some of the communities in Bohol,, Siargao
                      and Sulu. With this, SEP and GRM mechanisms shall provide IP-sensitive approaches. IPs shall also be consulted, and
                      strategies for their meaningful participation shall be outlined in the SEP. Equity issues over access to water resources
                      shall also be considered in the Project's design and strategy ensuring that IP communities have continuous access to
                      the different ecosystem services derived from the water resources as well as access to potable water services.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The project could adversely impact tangible cultural heritage as the civil works may involve
                      substantial soil excavation necessitating preparation of chance-find procedures to be integrated into the ESMF and
                      the ECOP. The PCN stage initial E&S Screening indicates that no cultural heritage will be adversely affected by the
                      project.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      Based on the current project design ESS 9 is currently not relevant for the project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No



                    Jun 05, 2025                                                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                       In Part
                       The Philippine environmental policies such as environmental certification/ clearance for sub-projects, application of
                       labor policies, GBV and SEA/SH laws shall be applicable for the Philippines phase of the MPA. Application of BF for
                       other phases of the MPA will be assessed on a case to basis for the respective country (Mangolia, Indonesia, PNG) and
                       depending on the scope and nature of the activities proposed.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The project will prepare the following instruments before appraisal:
                     -Preparation of the ESCP, ESMF (and ESIA and LARF as may be applicable for sub-projects that may be implemented in
                     the first year), LMP, LARF (as part of ESMF) and SEP
                     -Conduct of public stakeholder consultations
                     -Disclosure of ESCP, ESMF, LARF, LMP and SEP




Public Disclosure    III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Ma Fiorella Delos Reyes Fabella       Title:          Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                    Specialist

                      Email:                  mfabella@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Aude-Sophie Rodella                   Job Title:      Lead Water Economist

                      Email:                  arodella@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Midori Makino                         Job Title:      Lead Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                    Specialist, Program Leader

                      Email:                  Mmakino@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT



                    Jun 05, 2025                                                                                                  Page 9 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                  Ma Fiorella Delos Reyes Fabella, Aude-Sophie Rodella, Midori Makino

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:         Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari

                     ADM Social Specialist:                Paul Tudtud Adolfo




Public Disclosure




                    Jun 05, 2025                                                                                                 Page 10 of 10
