Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                              Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 10/14/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05241




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 21, 2025                                                                                             Page 1 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510696                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       InfraDev-Salta               2026

                     Operation Name            Resilient Infrastructure for Regional Economic Development and Job Creation - Salta

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Argentina                 Argentina                                LATIN AMERICA AND            Transport
                                                                                        CARIBBEAN

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Province of Salta         Secretariat of Finance and Financial     02-Feb-2026                  26-Feb-2026
                                               Planning, Province of Salta

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     02-Oct-2025               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To enhance access to resilient infrastructure and increase institutional capacity to support economic development and
                     job creation in Salta.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project aims to support the development of strategic infrastructure and logistics services in the Province of Salta
                     through four main components: (1) Investment in resilient and safe road infrastructure; (2) Development of logistics
                     centers to serve lithium and other productive sector firms; (3) Investment in critical water and wastewater treatment
                     infrastructure for the local communities; (4) Support to the mining sector by strengthening sustainability, oversight,
                     training, and transparency in mining operations.




                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     This Project is an MPA’s second phase aiming at supporting Argentina’s productive sectors representing new sources of
                     growth and contributing to economic diversification. Activities include a) Rehabilitation of a segment of RN51 (24 km
                     between Campo Quijano and los Chorrillos); b) Infrastructure for logistics nodes; c) Improvement of water and
                     sanitation (in Olacapato and San Antonio de los Cobres localities); and d) Strengthening mining sector governance and
                     technical capacity. Some activities financed through other sources of financing could create enabling infrastructure for
                     the nodes and seem to fit the ESF definition for associated facilities , which will be further surveyed before appraisal.
                     When appropiate, relevant ESS will be applied to any identified associated facilities.
                     The Project will be implemented across urban, industrial, and rural zones within Salta Province. Specifically, the basic
                     infrastructure investment and planning of the Olacapato logistics node and the water and sanitation infrastructure
                     (Olacapato drinking water plant and new distribution works; and San Antonio de los Cobres wastewater treatment
                     plant), will be located within the Multiple Use Natural Reserve Los Andes. These facilities will be sited in the Reserve's
                     Sustainable Use Zone and Industrial Sector, which are designated as suitable for extractive activities and infrastructure
                     development. It should be noted that the Project will not finance any Reserve management activities.
                     Most interventions are in the Puna region, known for plateaus, mountains, and salt lakes, with a cold, dry climate and
                     scarce water. Vegetation is sparse but adapted, and biodiversity remains rich. The area has moderate to high seismic
                     risk.
                     Salta has a high indigenous population density—10% self-identified as Indigenous Peoples (IPs) in the 2022 census,
                     representing at least 14 ethnic groups. Project areas include Kolla and Atacama communities in Los Andes, Tastil near
                     RN51, and no IP communities in Güemes




Public Disclosure
                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Salta Secretariat of Finance and Financial Planning (SFFP), has an E&S team that has experience with international
                     financing entities (IADB, FONPLATA, and WB). The E&S team includes an environmental specialist and a social specialist.
                     Salta is recipient of a Grant Facility for Project Preparation (GFPP Grant No. TF0C8847-AR) to facilitate the preparation
                     of a proposed project, including development of E&S management tools for the Project.

                     The overall E&S responsibility and coordination will rely on the E&S team of the SFFP. This team will work with all
                     relevant government areas, as Secretariat of Mining and Energy, Secretariat of Public Works, Ministry of Production, the
                     Provincial Roads Directorate (PVD), and Aguas del Norte, among others. In addition, if needed, the Project
                     Implementation Unit will lead and coordinate a training plan for the various government entities involved with the
                     subprojects to strengthen institutional local capacity. Nonetheless, as this is the first Project for Salta under ESF,
                     institutional capacity on labor management, stakeholder engagement and other environmental and social management
                     skills will be assessed during preparation and, if needed, strengthened during Project implementation.
                     Salta government has two areas related to IPs: the Provincial Institute for IPs, that is directed by representatives from
                     the different peoples, with the goal of raising the needs form communities and follow up on policy implementation, and
                     a Secretariat for Indigenous Affairs, that is in charge of updating the register of IP communities and the territorial
                     survey. This secretariat also articulates with government areas to assess projects' impacts on communities and develop
                     consultations with communities.


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                 High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     The project involves investments in transport, logistics, water and sanitation infrastructure, and mining sector
                     governance in Salta province. It involves i) the rehabilitation of an existing road (24k m) (paving, climate resilience
                     improvements, and drainage works associated to flood risk), which would mainly generate disruption due to
                     construction (e.g. dust and noise pollution, air quality effects, etc.), community and occupational health and safety
                     risks, and potential adverse impacts on environmentally sensitive areas within the Puna area and arhaeological
                     heritage sites; ii) earth removal and drainage works, construction of basic infrastructure networks (drinking water,
                     lighting, sanitation, drainage, telecommunications), and tree planting at Güemes node, as well as infrastructure
                     improvements at the Olacapato node; these could also lead to soil erosion, water contamination from construction
                     runoff, and habitat disturbance; iii) water and wastewater treatment infrastructure in Olacapato and San Antonio de
                     los Cobres, which additional risks of water pollution and disruption to local ecosystems. Although large infrastructure
                     is not envisaged and these risks and impacts are considered manageable with standard mitigation measures, the
                     environmental risk is classified substantial at this stage because i) the Puna area is highly sensitivity to environmental
                     pressures, and ii) potential indirect and/or cumulative impacts on biodiversity and water could occur as a result of the
                     promotion of mining and other development activities, and increased traffic in the rehabilitated road. The project’s
                     E&S assessments will analyze all these effects and provide appropriate measures for the design and construction of
                     the activities in accordance with the ESF and the ‘mitigation hierarchy’ approach. E&S capacity development
                     initiatives will be part of this project with a focus on cumulative impacts, water management, consultation, strategic



Public Disclosure
                     communication and conflict resolution.
                                                                                                                                            High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project supports development corridors in Salta, Argentina, through infrastructure investments including RN51
                     road rehabilitation, logistics nodes in General Güemes and Olacapato, water and sanitation improvements in the Puna
                     region, and technical support to the mining sector. These activities trigger a High social risk rating at this stage
                     because in the context of Salta, although the mining component is being designed to deliver positive outcomes, the
                     perception that all infrastructure financed under this operation will promote mining production in the Province is
                     expected to generate concerns among certain local stakeholders. In addition, although most works are planned on
                     existing roads or fiscal land, minimizing land acquisition, RN51 rehabilitation and logistics node construction may
                     require land acquisition, potentially causing physical/economic displacement. Project activities located in Los Andes
                     department may affect lands under custumary use of Indigenous Peoples, thus, requiring Free, Prior, and Informed
                     Consent and culturally appropriate benefit-sharing measures. In this sense, risks of exclusion will be assessed during
                     preparation. Labor influx during construction may lead to social tensions and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual
                     Harassment risks. Water and sanitation works may pose community health and safety risks, to be addressed via E&S
                     management plans. The region’s high poverty and unmet basic needs increase the risk of inequitable benefit
                     distribution. A robust Stakeholder Engagement Plan and the Indigenous Peoples Plan will ensure inclusive
                     consultation with vulnerable groups and other stakeholders sensitive to mining. The High risk rating also reflects mid-
                     and long-term risks from increased worker presence in underdeveloped and protected areas with presence of IP.
                     Broader social impacts—Gender Based Violence (GBV), HIV/AIDS, land tenure tensions, and cultural disruption—will
                     be evaluated and mitigated through design and planning.



                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      Activities that could have E&S risks and impacts will be assessed during preparation and managed during
                      implementation . This includes risks of exclusion from project benefits of IP and other vulnerable groups and potential
                      indirect impacts as a result of development activities promotion. By Appraisal, the borrower will prepare a draft E&S
                      Management Framework (ESMF) and E&S Assessments (ESA) commensurate to the nature, scale, and scope of the
                      investments planned. Appropriate measures following the mitigation hierarchy will be designed to manage any
                      potential significant risks and impacts. Ongoing monitoring and reporting will ensure compliance with the E&S
                      instruments and ESCP, as appropiate . All contractor agreements will include E&S requirements. Adaptive
                      management will address emerging and unforessen issues. The project will follow the ESF, EHS Guidelines, GIIP, and
                      local regulations. The ESF principles will apply to TA activities with potential downstream E&S risks.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      A stakeholder analysis will identify Project-Affected Parties, including vulnerable groups and other interested parties,
                      considering the risks and indirect impacts from the promotion of mining development, transport, and water
                      management, as well as IP and biodiversity issues. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will guide engagement
                      across project phases, with inclusive consultations, and culturally appropriate feedback mechanisms. Past
                      consultations on E&S impact assessmests of the logistics nodes will be reviewed and complemented as needed,



Public Disclosure
                      together with the updating of these documents to meet ESF requirements. During preparation, existing provincial
                      Grievance Mechanisms (GMs) will be assessed and strengthened if necessary. The GM will offer accessible,
                      confidential, and transparent grievance resolution, with an appeals process. The PIU will lead SEP implementation,
                      ensuring adequate resources, staff training and strong communication strategies.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The Project will be implemented by public servants (from Secretariat of Finance and Financial Planning, Secretariat of
                      Mining and Energy, Secretariat of Public Works, Provincial Roads Directorate, and Aguas del Norte), direct (individual
                      consultancies), and contracted workers (contractors for civil works related to road, logistics nodes, and
                      water/sanitation infrastructure). According to a WB assessment, the applicable local legal framework is in general
                      materially consistent to the requirements of ESS2. Nonetheless, local institutional capacity will be assessed during
                      preparation to ensure an adequate implementation and monitoring of labor and working conditions. Additional
                      measures will be included in the ESCP and associated procedures, such as a specific GMs for project workers and a
                      code of conduct that includes SEA/SH prevention. Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) aspects will be incorporated
                      in the ESMF, the subprojects ESMPs or OHS Plans as relevant.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      The project involves infrastructure rehabilitation and construction activities, particularly road works and the
                      development of logistics nodes and water/wastewater infrastructure. These activities will consume resources (e.g.,
                      energy, water, raw materials) and generate waste and emissions. The project will include i)energy and water


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                      efficiency measures (including actions to minimize water use in a water-scarce area - the Puna , ii)management of
                      construction and operational waste, iii) control of air emissions (including dust), and assessment of GHG emissions
                      associated with transport. Resource efficiency and pollution prevention measures will be assessed and managed in
                      line with WBG EHS Guidelines and GIIP as well as local legislation, whichever are more stringent in any specific
                      context. Generic mitigation measures will be included in the ESMF following the mitigation hierarchy and detailed in
                      the subproject's ESMP or specific management plans.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant to this project due to the planned infrastructure works. Key potential community health and safety
                      risks include construction-related impacts (noise, dust, traffic), increased traffic and road safety risks, potential
                      impacts from labor influx, and risks associated with water and sanitation infrastructure. Thus, the ESMF will contain
                      specific measures to ensure that appropriate mitigation measures are in place, including signage and fencing, where
                      appropriate; planning and communication of diversions; presence of road safety personnel; speed limit reduction,
                      among others. Also, the application of universal accessibility in the design of project activities will be explored. In
                      addition, potential impacts such as higher rates of GBV, HIV/AIDS transmission, social tensions, and disruption of
                      community cultural values due to the increase influx of workers will be also assessed under the ESMF and ESMPs,
                      that will also identify the corresponding mitigation measures.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                 Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant as the project may require land acquisition, particularly for RN51 rehabilitation and logistics node




Public Disclosure
                      development, potentially causing economic displacement. While major impacts are not expected at concept stage—
                      since RN51 works will occur on existing roads and other infrastructure, as logistic nodes and water and sanitation
                      infraestructura, will be deveoloped on fiscal land—this will be confirmed during preparation. The ESCP will include
                      provisions to ensure that gaps between the national and provincial framework and the ESS5 are addressed and site-
                      specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are developed if needed. The project will prioritize avoiding and/or
                      minimizing displacement. If prepared, RAPs will include measures for compensation, livelihood restoration, and
                      support for vulnerable groups. If Voluntary Land Donation (VLD) is considered, it will follow ESS5 criteria. The
                      implementing agency’s capacity will be assessed and strengthened as needed.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                  Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project poses potential risks to biodiversity and habitats, particularly activities within the Multiple Use Natural
                      Reserve Los Andes and Quebrada del Toro area. While most work is planned for already modified areas, the unique
                      and fragile Puna ecosystem—with its endemic species—demands careful assessment of all potential direct, indirect,
                      and cumulative impacts. Key potential biodiversity issues include impacts on habitats due to construction activities
                      and potential disturbance to local fauna. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will guide
                      avoidance, reduction, and mitigation of negative effects on biodiversity during both construction and operation. The
                      SEP will guide stakeholder engagement on biodiversity issues. Site-specific Environmental and Social Management
                      Plans (ESMPs) will detail tailored measures to safeguard critical or sensitive habitats if needed, ensuring
                      comprehensive biodiversity protection throughout the project’s implementation.




                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      During preparation, the SFFP will conduct a social assessment under the ESMF to identify Indigenous Peoples (IPs) in
                      the project’s area of influence, using culturally appropriate methods to assess socio-cultural characteristics, territorial
                      attachment, and potential impacts. The project will prioritize impact avoidance and mitigation and ensure benefit-
                      sharing for IPs in the implementation area. An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be developed through inclusive,
                      gender-sensitive consultations with customary institutions, and a culturally adapted GM. Preliminary data indicate
                      Kolla and Atacama communities in Los Andes department and Tastil groups near RN 51. The Olacapato node may
                      overlap with customary IP land; if confirmed, FPIC will be applied. Consultations previously held by Salta Province
                      with IPs will be reviewed for ESS7 compliance, and complementary ones carried out if needed.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      Project activities will be developed in areas that may contain cultural heritage sites. The ESMF will assess potential
                      risks and impacts from project infrastructure on cultural heritage, particularly on the tangible and intangible cultural
                      heritage of IPs and other vulnerable groups. This assessment will be informed by consultations with these groups, and
                      with cultural heritage experts. The ESMF, and all future site-specific ESMPs, will furthermore include: (i) Chance Finds
                      Procedures for the construction areas that will include clauses requiring civil contractors to take proper protective
                      measures in case cultural heritage sites are discovered, including to stop construction activities if cultural property
                      sites are found during construction; and (ii) any needed mitigation measures to avoid impacts or restore community
                      cultural sites. All site-specific ESMP measures will be reflected in corresponding construction contracts.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      The standard is not relevant. The project will not involve any financial intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           In Part
                       The WB Overview Assessment included an assessment of Salta’s legal and institutional framework for E&S
                       management (https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-
                       reports/documentdetail/099707007022538679). Regarding ESS2 , laws and regulations have been considered
                       appropriate to cover most risks and impacts associated with operations, and activities will be managed relying on
                       national and provincial requirements. Additional actions will be assessed during preparation and included in the ESMF
                       and/or the ESCP to reinforce and ensure the relevant WB’s E&S Standards, requiring the borrower to promptly notify
                       the Bank of any changes to the Borrower E&S management framework that may materially adversely affect the
                       Borrower’s ability to manage ESS2 risks and impacts and the measures to address said changes. Also, the ESMF and/or


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                         Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                       ESCP, as apropiate, will include complementary measures such as a specific GMs for project workers and a code of
                       conduct that includes SEA/SH prevention.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                       There will not be financing partners related to this project. Nonetheless, the province is working in parallel financing
                       with IADB and FONPLATA. A common approach for the management of the environmental and social risks associated
                       with the Project is not required. Nonetheless, the three banks (WB, FONPLATA and IADB) agreed to find ways to
                       simplify and unify criteria for drafting E&S management instruments, in a manner that ensures consistency with
                       objectives of the ESF.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Prior to appraisal, the borrower will prepare draft versions of the following documents that provide the necessary level
                     of detail to inform stakeholder engagement and Bank decision-making, and are key for understanding the project’s
                     most relevant E&S risks and impacts:
                     a.       ESMF that will include, as appropriate, i) analysis of relevant indirect and/or cumulative E&S impacts that may
                     result from all project’s activities (e.g. biodiversity, water resources) and ii) guidelines for those undefined project’s
                     activities related to (a) preparing ESMP’s where applicable; (b) Community Health and Safety; (c) Chance Find
                     Procedures; (d) E&S Training Plan; (e) preparing Biodiversity Management measures; (f) Solid Waste and Hazardous



Public Disclosure
                     Substance Management; (g) Contingencies and Attention to Emergencies; (h) a Traffic Management Plan; and (i) a
                     Labor Management and Health and Safety Plan (HSE Plan)
                     b.       Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including Grievance Redress Mechanism.
                     c.       Social Assessment on impacts of Project activities on IP, that will inform the ESMF and an IPP (to be finalized
                     after appraisal)
                     d.       As part of the Project's component 4 (strengthening mining sector governance and technical capacity), E&S
                     capacity development initiatives will be designed including i) the development of environmental baselines for the Puna
                     region (providing the reference data needed to assess cumulative impacts from multiple lithium projects), and ii)
                     specialized training to strengthen E&S oversight for mining operations.
                     e.       Other E&S capacity development opportunities that will be part of the project are related to consultation,
                     strategic communication and conflict resolution.

                     The following Environmental and Social Assessments will be prepared using GFPP funding during the project’s
                     preparation and early implementation phases. All requirements will be consistent with the ESMF to be drafted prior to
                     appraisal, and the assessments will adhere to the principles of the ESF.
                     f.      E&S assessments for RN51
                     g.      E&S assessments for water infrastructure in Olacapato
                     h.      E&S impact analysis of the detailed design for the wastewater treatment plant in San Antonio de los Cobres
                     i.      When applicable, the ESF principles will apply to those TA activities with potential of downstream impacts.

                     All these assessments and analysis will take into account the following E&S assessments already conducted by Salta:


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                       Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                     •       Environmental Impact Report for the Güemes Logistics Node and Dry Port (2022)
                     •       Environmental, Social, and Economic Impact Study for the Development of the Industrial Area, Logistics, and
                     Services in Cauchari, Department of Los Andes - Salta (Nov 2019)


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Aiga Stokenberga                       Title:          Senior Transport Economist

                      Email:                  astokenberga@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Javier Aguilar                         Job Title:      Sr Mining Spec.

                      Email:                  jaguilar@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433



Public Disclosure
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                        Aiga Stokenberga, Javier Aguilar

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                               Lucia Rossi

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                      Maria Lucrecia Bertelli




                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                  Page 9 of 9
