Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 12/29/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04653




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 19, 2026                                                                          Page 1 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510690                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        SEADRM II                  2026

                     Operation Name            Lao PDR Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project II

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Lao People's              Lao People's Democratic Republic          EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC      Urban, Resilience and
                     Democratic Republic                                                                            Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                     Lao People's              Department of Planning - Ministry of      05-Jan-2026                31-Mar-2026
                     Democratic Republic       Finance, Financial Regulatory
                     (Lao PDR)                 Department (FRD) - Ministry of
                                               Finance, Department of Waterways -
                                               Ministry of Public Works and



Public Disclosure
                                               Transport, Department of Meteorology
                                               and Hydrology - Ministry of Agriculture
                                               and Environment

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     10-Dec-2025               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Enhance flood resilience in target areas of Lao PDR and strengthen the Government's capacity for hydrometeorological
                     services and financing post-disaster response.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities



                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                    Page 2 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                     The proposed project takes an integrated approach to disaster risk management, supporting activities across the four
                     thematic areas of flood risk management (including nature-based solutions), early warning systems, disaster risk
                     financing and insurance, and mainstreaming disaster risk management (DRM) in economic planning. Component 1 will
                     finance flood protection infrastructure investments in three provinces and feasibility studies for informing future flood
                     risk management in additional two provinces. Component 2 will finance improvements in delivery of weather, climate,
                     and hydrological services and pilot solutions for last-mile early warning dissemination. Component 3 will strengthen
                     financial resilience to natural disasters by financing insurance premium to facilitate continued access to sovereign risk
                     insurance and related technical assistance activities. Component 4 will include overall project management and
                     coordination and technical support activities for mainstreaming of DRM in planning and investment.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Building on SEADRM I (P160930), SEADRM II is designed and implemented as a multi-sectoral flood and climate risk
                     management operation in prioritized provinces across Lao PDR. Sub-component 1.1 will continue to support flood
                     protection infrastructure such as riverbank protection embankments, canal improvements, water gates with pumping
                     stations, river-side parks and trees-planting in Oudomxay (ODX), Luang Prabang (LPB), and Bolikhamxay (BKX) sub-
                     project’s area. Sub-component 1.2 will support technical and analytical studies to support integrated urban flood risk
                     management in other priority areas such as Luang Namtha (LNT) and Vientiane Capital City (VCC). While most of the
                     project activities will be situated in flood-prone urban and peri-urban areas, the proposed LPB sub-project located in
                     LPB province is within the Mekong River which is a Key Biodiversity Area (KBA) with high biodiversity values as
                     confirmed in the process of compiling the revised 2011 CEPF Ecosystem Profile for the Indo-Burma Hotspot (2012).



Public Disclosure
                     Some project activities can also be proposed in the potentially degraded ecologically sensitive wetlands in LNT and VCC
                     but not designated as any legal status of protected area or part of RAMSAR Convention. Additionally, LPB, a UNESCO
                     World Heritage site, cultural heritage sensitivities will require special attention due to its unique historical and social
                     significance. The specific outputs and site locations for activities under Sub-component 1.2 (Strengthening Urban
                     Resilience): will finance activities for strengthening flood risk management in Vientiane Capital City and Luang Namtha
                     province, and Component 4 (Project Management and Coordination) will also finance few technical support activities
                     for mainstreaming DRM considerations in government’s development planning such as the next iteration of the NSEDP,
                     however, these activities will only be suggested at the later stage during project implementation. Sub-component 3.1
                     (Financing the Costs of Disaster Risk Finance Instrument) will facilitate continued access to pre-arranged, market-based
                     disaster risk financing instruments such as insurance to support the government of Laos (GOL) to purchase new
                     insurance policy to cover goods, services, and physical works for short-term emergency response, recovery, and
                     maintenance of essential public services, such as pre-existing schools or health centers damaged by natural disaster
                     countywide.

                     The Component 5 (CERC) will provide funding for immediate response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency
                     caused natural or man-made disasters.

                     In relation to the social project setting, Muang Xay, the provincial capital of ODX has around 32,000 residents; LPB town
                     overs 56,000 residents and Paksan in BKX has about 45,000 residents. ODX is home to multiple ethnic groups, mainly
                     Khmu and Hmong, who meet the ESS7 criteria for IPs. Vulnerable populations, including ethnic households and informal
                     settlers along riverbanks, may be affected by the flood protection and riverbank embankment works. Potential impacts
                     include resettlement, land acquisition, economic displacement, or reduced access to river-based resources. In addition,

                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                     women, people with disabilities, and the elderly may encounter barriers in accessing project-related information and
                     participating in consultations and other project activities.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The lead implementing agency will be the Department of Planning (DOP) under the Ministry of Finance, which will be
                     responsible for overall project management and coordination and implementing Component 4. Component 1 will be
                     implemented by the Department of Waterways (DOW) under the Ministry of Public Works and Transport (MPWT) in
                     collaboration with the Public Works and Transport Institute (PTI) which is in charge of ESF implementation. Component
                     2 will be implemented by the Department of Meteorology and Hydrology (DMH) under the Ministry of Agriculture and
                     Environment (MAE), while Financial Regulatory Department under MOF will implement Component 3.
                     MPWT has extensive experience implementing World Bank-financed projects under the World Bank’s (WB)
                     environmental and social safeguards policy including the ongoing SEADRM I Project (P160930). The PTI of MPWT has
                     extensive experience with WB road projects implemented under the safeguards policies as well as Environmental and
                     Social Framework (ESF) and is currently involved in the implementation of the Southeast Asia Regional Economic
                     Corridor and Connectivity Project (SEARECC) and the Lao PDR Climate Resilient Road Connectivity Improvement Project
                     (CRRCIP) under the WB ESF. Agencies including DMH, DOP and Financial Regulatory Department/MOF have limited
                     exposure to ESF requirements. These agencies will require capacity strengthening and dedicated E&S staffing to support
                     implementation of ESF related activities. The project will assign dedicated focal persons for ESF and will hire E&S
                     consultants to support ESF implementation for PMU and each PIU, capacity building for national and provincial levels,
                     and include ESF implementation procedures in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). Close implementation
                     support missions from the Bank during the first 12 months will reinforce capacity.




Public Disclosure
                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial
                     The environmental risk is assessed to be Substantial due to the potential risks and impacts from the construction of
                     flood protection infrastructure, canal improvements, water gates, river-side parks and tree-planting in ODX, LPB, and
                     BKX. These interventions are expected to generate more positive environmental outcomes; however, they may also
                     result in site-specific environmental risks and impacts, including soil erosion and sedimentation into waterways during
                     earthworks, temporary deterioration of surface water quality from turbidity, spills, or wastewater discharge, air and
                     noise pollution from construction activities, loss of bank-side vegetation, risks and hazards from improper storage and
                     generation of waste from civil works, community and worker health and safety risks, and threats to sensitive habitat
                     of some aquatic species along the Mekong mainstream and its tributaries. Activities may interact with riverine
                     ecosystems and drainage patterns, potentially altering natural hydrology if not carefully managed. The proposed LPB
                     sub-project is located within the Mekong River a Key Biodiversity Area (KBA) from Luang Prabang to Vientiane with
                     presence of high biodiversity values. The ESMF will provide guidance for risk and impact assessment to be undertaken
                     during preparation of the site-specific instruments to ensure that risks to biodiveristy values are appropriately
                     identified and managed in accordance with ESS6. For LPB province, it is required additional attention due to cultural
                     heritage sensitivity. Component 1.1 and 1.2 will also finance feasibility studies, detailed engineering designs, and a
                     Strategic Investment Plan for LNT. Although these activities do not themselves cause environmental impacts, they


                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                    Page 4 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                     may inform future infrastructure investments that could generate downstream impacts if implemented, including
                     changes to hydrology, sediment transport, and habitat conditions. Such future investments could contribute to
                     cumulative or transboundary impacts, particularly in the Mekong basin, and these risks may be further exacerbated
                     by climate change and extreme hydrological events. The ESMF will provide guidance to ensure that downstream,
                     cumulative, and transboundary risks are assessed and integrated into the FS and any associated environmental and
                     social instruments. Additionally, there is a potential of Unexploded Ordnance (UXO) risk for some construction civil
                     work for which ESCP requires the borrower to implement procedures in accordance with legislative requirements of
                     the National Regulatory Authority (NRA) to the UXO/Mine and ESMF for the UXO identification and clearance
                     activities. Baseline surveys is in progress to collect information for the development of site-specific ESMPs for ODX
                     subproject which will be finalized before project effectiveness. Component 2 will support the upgrade of existing
                     hydrometeorological stations, ICT systems and capacity building; while these are expected to have limited
                     environmental impacts, a procedure for electronic waste management will be prepared and implemented as part of
                     operation manual. SEADRM II component C3.1 will also support GOL to purchase new insurance policy when the
                     current SEADRIF policy financed by RETF “Improved Access to Disaster Risk Finance Project” (P505224) expires in May
                     2027. The Lao Contingency Plan (LCP) prepared and applied for the ongoing RETF will be adapted based on the
                     lessons learnt, proportionality of E&S risk pertaining to activities financed by insurance payouts and the capacity of
                     government counterparts to manage E&S risk and impact at different levels. Climate change risks will be integrated
                     into feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs as this is the core objective of the project, which commits to
                     designing flood protection infrastructure to appropriate climate-informed return periods and incorporating risk-
                     mitigation measures for hydromet facilities. An ESCP will be prepared to ensure such commitments are implemented.
                                                                                                                                   Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating



Public Disclosure
                     The social risk is rated as Substantial, primarily due to the nature and scale of civil works under the Component 1 that
                     will likely involve and require land acquisition, resettlement and other types of economic displacement, generate
                     work-related risks and impacts on local communities, and project workers. These include the vulnerable and ethnic
                     minority groups identified as IPs in ODX province particularly those living along riverbanks. Potential impacts on these
                     project affected people (PAP) also include disruptions and access restriction to water resources which their livelihood
                     partly rely on. The vulnerable groups to be potentially affected by the project activities include the poor, women-
                     headed households, and elderly persons, People with Disability, a group of Lesbian, Gays, Bio-sexual and Transgender
                     (LGBT) and migrant labors, displaced persons or informal settlers who may lack formal land titles. Khmu and Hmong
                     ethnic groups (IPs) are present in ODX and may be affected either directly or indirectly. Some of these ethic groups
                     particularly women and elder people face language and cultural barriers to participation, consultation, and access to
                     project-related information and early warning systems. In LPB, a UNESCO World Heritage City, works may affect
                     cultural heritage (CH) both tangible and intangible, local communities living in heritage-sensitive areas where cultural
                     norms and practices need to be carefully observed. Additional risks include community heath and safety (CHS) risks
                     and impacts associated with the construction works and labor influx (traffic and road safety, safety at construction
                     sites, particularly following the fatal incident involving the drowning of the child at the ODX sub-project site in 2023
                     and 2025 during and after the work under the project Phase 1, dust and noise, communicable diseases, Sexual
                     Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH), disturbance to local communities and tourism businesses in
                     LPB, and challenges in ensuring inclusive and meaningful engagement across diverse groups.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered


                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                     Page 5 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      The project involves civil works and other activities with potential E&S risks and impacts that require careful
                      screening, assessment, and management to meet ESS1 requirements. E&S impacts associated with the civil works
                      include resettlement, land acquisition, economic displacement, OHS, CHS including the risk of child drowning, risk
                      associated with labor influx (SEA/SH) and challenge to engagement of vulnerable groups, including ethnic minorities.
                      Potential downstream impacts from the implementation of the TA activities / feasibility studies financed through the
                      project will be covered by (a) conducting a SESA (if relevant) to inform the development of such feasibility study and
                      any technical assistance activities and/or (b) undertaking risk assessment (including screening for cumulative /
                      transboundary impacts) and developing proportionate E&S mitigation measures, as part of feasibility studies/TA
                      programs. ESCP further requires for the borrower/ IAs to prepare and adopt procedures on drafting and approval
                      process (including clearance by the Association) of Terms of Reference (ToR), work plans defining the scope of the
                      studies and the outputs of the studies so that the advise and other support provided is consistent with ESSs 1-10.
                      Cumulative impacts and transboundary water issues are anticipated considering that multiple flood structures and
                      river protection works may alter flows and water quality across boundaries. Considering the lessons learned from the
                      implementation of E&S safeguards policies under the first phase project, the borrower has prepared the ESCP, SEP,
                      ESMF and RPF to guide the identification and mitigation of E&S risk for activities to be confirmed during the project
                      implementation. The ESMF incorporates screening tools, environmental and social management procedures, and
                      guidance for preparation, implementation and monitoring of site-specific instruments such as ESIA, SS-ESMP, C-
                      ESMP, BMP, CHIA and CHMP among others. For the sub-project in ODX where design and location are confirmed, a



Public Disclosure
                      SS-ESMP, ARAP and EGDP are being prepared and will be cleared and disclosed prior to the project effectiveness. A
                      CERC Addendum to the ESMF and a CERC Manual will be prepared after project effectiveness in line with ESCP
                      commitments. The Lao Contingency Plan (LCP) applied under ongoing RETF (P505224) will be adapted and
                      implemented where relevant to manage E&S risk and impact induced from activities financed by insurance payouts
                      supported under SEADRM II C3.1.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      The project will affect and involve diverse groups of stakeholders, including urban communities, ethnic minorities,
                      informal settlers, and small businesses. The Borrower has prepared a SEP to ensure inclusive, culturally appropriate
                      engagement and a functional grievance redress mechanism (GRM), including GRM for the local villages and ethnic
                      groups, SEA/SH-sensitive channels, and GRM for project workers (as part of the LMP). To enhance community
                      engagement and consultation with vulnerable and ethnic groups especially those who are illiterate, the project will
                      hire social consultants with required facilitating skill and continue to engage ethnic staff from government mass
                      organizations including Lao Front for National Development and Lao Women’s Union in charge of ethnic group and
                      women advocacy and promotion respectively. In addition, the existing set of Education, Information, and
                      Communication (IEC) materials applied under the original project will be further developed in Lao and relevant ethnic
                      languages to be used during community consultation and information dissemination. The IEC materials will also be
                      tailored for ethnic groups and illiterate individuals. Based on the existing national system and structure, The GRM will
                      include a Village Mediation Committee established in all village nationwide with focal points appointed to deal with
                      different categories of project related grievances and confidential SEA/SH reporting. Special attention will be given to



                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                     Page 6 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                      women, ethnic groups, and vulnerable households. All ESF instruments have been and will continue to be consulted
                      with these project stakeholders and disclosed both online and locally in accessible formats.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The project involves direct workers (government and PMU/PIU staff), contracted workers (for civil works and
                      supervision), and primary supply workers who may be hired by the work contractors. Key labor risks include
                      occupational health and safety (OHS) incidents expected from use of heavy machine and vehicles including dump
                      trucks and sharp equipment machinery, exposure to hazardous materials, water safety-related risks, employment
                      discrimination, SEA/SH, Violence against Children (VAC), and child labor. LMP has been prepared as part of the ESMF
                      prior to appraisal to manage risks in accordance with ESS2 and national Labor Law (2023). The LMP outlines measures
                      for fair treatment, terms of employment, OHS risk management (include excavation, in-channel works, night works
                      during low flows, hot works, electrical and confined space risks), grievance redress, and protection of vulnerable and
                      ethnic workers. Contractors will be required to prepare site-specific labor procedures, provide training, PPE,
                      necessary facilities for both female and male workers, and establish and implement worker's GRM. The LMP also
                      addresses risks related to primary supply workers and includes COC preventing SEA/SH risks. Contractor and sub-
                      contractor management will be undertaken. This could be by (a) incorporating the relevant aspects of the ESCP into
                      the E&S specifications of the procurement documents and contracts with contractors (b) cascading the requirements
                      to sub-contractors and (c) undertake regular monitoring to ensure that the contractors comply and that they require
                      their subcontractors to comply with the E&S specifications of their respective contracts.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      The project will involve construction activities including extraction of construction materials (stone/gravel, soil and
                      sand) that may generate dust, noise, exhaust emissions from machinery, and pollution from improper waste disposal
                      or fuel leakage. Movement of heavy machinery and construction activities could also cause significant soil
                      disturbance that may exacerbate soil erosion. The ESMF provides detailed guidance on measures to avoid and
                      minimize such impacts, including guidance on resource efficiency and pollution prevention for all components. The
                      sourcing of construction materials will prioritize licensed quarries and borrow pits. Establishment of new sites in
                      protected or ecologically sensitive areas, productive land, or forest zones will be prohibited. The project will ensure
                      that pollution prevention, waste handling, and response measures are provided as part of SS-ESMP and C-ESMP and
                      in place prior to the commencement of civil works.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      Based on empirical experience under the original project, potential CHS risks include risk of children entering
                      construction sites to play or swim, leading to potential drowning incidents, road safety risk, traffic disruptions, dust,
                      noise and reduced access to rivers and water sources used for daily livelihood activities (e.g., washing, bathing,
                      fishing). Labor influx may elevate risks of SEA/SH, and potential risk of communicable diseases (air, wastewater born,
                      sexually transmitted diseases). Climate change is expected to further exacerbate CHS risks across the project
                      locations. Downscaled CMIP-5 climate models indicate an increase in the frequency and intensity of extreme
                      precipitation events and higher temperatures, which heighten the likelihood of flooding, riverbank erosion, and
                      localized landslides. These climate-related hazards may increase risks to communities living near construction sites
                      and completed infrastructure, including overtopping of flood protection structures or failure of drainage systems


                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                       Page 7 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                      during extreme events. To address these risks, the project will integrate climate-informed hydrological assumptions
                      and geotechnical parameters into the siting and structural design of all flood protection works. The ESMF will require
                      proportionate climate and geohazard due diligence, and emergency preparedness and response measures will be
                      incorporated into site-specific ESMPs. There is a potential of Unexploded Ordnance (UXO) risk for some construction
                      civil work for which ESCP requires the borrower to implement procedures in accordance with legislative requirements
                      of NRA and ESMF for the UXO identification and clearance activities.. CHS risk management measures are provided in
                      the ESMF of the project. SS-ESMPs will be prepared in accordance with the ESMF. SS-ESMPs will include measures to
                      manage the risks due to community exposure to construction and labor influx related risks, such as signage, traffic
                      management plans, public awareness raising campaign, safety measures to manage the risk of child entering and
                      drowning in the project sites, heath care protocols, grievance mechanism and emergency response procedures. Site
                      layout and construction techniques and scheduling will consider patterns and needs for community livelihood and
                      tourist activities. Infrastructure designs will integrate universal access requirements. MPWT and PTI, have prior
                      experience implementing SEA/SH-related measures under the three ongoing infrastructure projects that apply ESF
                      (ongoing original DRM project, and two road projects) with no SEA/SH incidents identified and reported. The project
                      should be able to monitor implementation across the full span of the work with support from supervision consulting
                      firms. The project will work with and use the existing multi-ministerial network or structure established nationwide to
                      prevent, combat and deal with GBV and VAC issues and incidents. Although the risk profile of labor influx is assessed
                      to be medium due to the potential need for external labors, the risk is manageable as contractors are encouraged to
                      hire local labors except the small number of skilled labors and personnel in management positions. For the purpose
                      of precaution, the project will apply the above described standard SEA/SH prevention measures. These will be
                      reflected in the ESMF, LMP, and site-specific ESMPs, monitored and reported on a regular basis.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant due to expected resettlement, land acquisition, and other types of economic displacement from civil
                      works under Component 1 especially those households along riverbanks. Project Affected households and persons
                      (PAHs and PAPs) will be eligible for compensation and livelihood restoration as per the ESS5. The RPF has been
                      prepared to guide resettlement planning for those sub-projects with design and scope of impacts still to be finalized.
                      The RPF provides guidance for preparing site-specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or Abbreviated (ARAP) for the
                      sub-project to expand flood protection and embankment structure with land acquisition and resettlement inevitable.
                      For the work sub-project in ODX where design and location are confirmed, RAP will be prepared, cleared and
                      disclosed before project effectiveness. The ESCP will define responsibilities and timelines for RPF and ARAP
                      preparation and implementation. The works will not begin until the compensation and resettlement processes are
                      completed. As per the Borrower’s request, a Memo has been approved by the Bank for IDA fund to finance through
                      the project both compensation and livelihood restoration.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                 Relevant
                      Resources

                      The civil works in Luang Prabang overlaps with section of Mekong river which is designated as Key Biodiversity Areas
                      (KBAs), for their high biodiversity values. An assessment will be conducted to ensure that the risk and impact on the
                      high biodiversity values are carefully identified and managed as required in accordance with ESS6 during the
                      preparation and implementation of the Site Specific instrument. The other subprojects are not anticipated to occur
                      within critical habitats, although exact locations are not yet confirmed. However, flood risk management structures


                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                    Page 8 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                      may also cause localized impacts on aquatic biodiversity, including disruption of habitats, migratory routes, and
                      changes in water quality. Construction of riverbank protection may also result in the loss of bank-side vegetation. The
                      risks to biodiversity and aquatic ecosystems will be assessed, along with proposed measures to avoid, minimize, and
                      mitigate potential impacts.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                               Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is relevant as ethnic groups of Khmu and Hmong meeting the ESS7 criteria are present in ODX province. These
                      groups maintain distinct cultural identities and languages, and may face barriers to participation, access to
                      information, and benefits. The Borrower will develop a site-specific Ethnic Group Engagement Plan (EGEP) for ODX
                      based on the version successfully implemented under the original project. The EGDP will provide inclusive approach
                      to enhancing ethnic households and community engagement and ensure their access to project information and
                      benefit. It will include requirement and procedures for grievance redress mechanism (GRM) tailored to each of the
                      Hmong and Khmu ethnic groups. Where necessary, community engagement and consultation will be conducted by
                      facilitators fluent in local languages and informed by cultural practices to ensure meaningful consultation and
                      participation. The EGDP will be cleared and disclosed prior to project effectiveness. The ESCP will outline
                      responsibilities and timelines for EGDF and EGDP preparation and implementation.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      The project includes civil works that may affect tangible or intangible cultural heritage in the project sites particularly




Public Disclosure
                      in Luang Prabang, a UNESCO World Heritage. The ESMF incorporates a Cultural Heritage Impact Assessment (CHIA)
                      guideline and template, including screening procedures, impact assessment and mitigation measures, to avoid or
                      minimize potential impacts on the tangible and intangible. A Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP) based on
                      CHIA will be developed for Luang Prabang site in close collaboration and consultation with UNESCO through the
                      Cultural Heritage Offices based in Luang Prabang City, Ministry of Information and Culture (Department for Heritage)
                      and relevant local authority and communities. The proposed project interventions are aligned with the Luang Prabang
                      city-wide UNESCO Safeguarding and Enhancement Plan, including required timebound engagement activities and
                      notification processes with the UNESCO office in LPB. For all project sites, site-specific ESMP will include chance find
                      procedures, and any physical works in or near heritage zones will require consultation with UNESCO, Department of
                      Heritage, local authorities, businesses and communities to ensure culturally appropriate planning and risk mitigation.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      The project will not involve FIs in project implementation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features


                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                        Page 9 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                          No
                       The Borrower's E&S Framework will not be used for the Project, in whole or in part. Nevertheless, where relevant and
                       applicable, provisions in the national legislations will be recognized and referred to in the ESF instruments to be
                       prepared and applied under the project.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             No
                       The World Bank has held discussions with several development partners including the Asian Development Bank (ADB),
                       Agence Française de Développement (AFD), the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and the Japan
                       International Cooperation Agency (JICA) to discuss their interest in providing co-financing or parallel financing for
                       SEADRM 2 Project. At this stage, it is not yet confirmed whether any other development partners will engage through
                       co-financing or parallel financing. The use of Common Approach will be discussed and agreed in case of financing
                       partners are identified.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     Adopt the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including the Labor Management Procedures
                     (LMP), environmental and social screening tools, and the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) with Grievance Redress
                     Mechanism and Resettlement Process Framework (RPF), prior to the commencement of project activities, and




Public Disclosure
                     implement these instruments throughout project implementation. Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower
                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     •        Set up institutional arrangement for the preparation and implementation of ESF related activities.
                     •        Conduct ESIA and develop SS-ESMP for other sites once locations and activities are confirmed.
                     •        Conduct Cultural Heritage Impact Assessment for Luang Prabang in close collaboration with UNESCO or other
                     heritage-sensitive areas before sub-project implementation.
                     •        Prepare, consult and disclose site-specific instruments for Oudomxay sub-project including Environmental and
                     Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), SS-ESMP, Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and Ethnic Group Engagement Plan before
                     effectiveness.
                     •        Prepare a CERC Addendum and CERC Manual after project effectiveness.
                     •        Set up a monitoring and reporting mechanism for ESF related activities, and
                     •        Prepare and implement capacity building and training on ESF requirements before project activities start and
                     throughout project lifetime.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Hemang Karelia                        Title:         Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                  Specialist




                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                 Page 10 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                      Email:                  hkarelia@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Hang Thu Vu                         Job Title:     Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                  tvu4@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Veronique Marie Morin Floissac      Job Title:     Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                 Specialist

                      Email:                  vmorin@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL




Public Disclosure
                     Task Team Leader(s):                     Hemang Karelia, Hang Thu Vu, Veronique Marie Morin Floissac

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:            Viengkeo Phetnavongxay

                     ADM Social Specialist:                   Sybounheuang Phandanouvong




                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                 Page 11 of 11
