Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Apr-2026 | Report No: PIDDC01656




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID               Operation Name
Thailand                       P510631                    Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          06-Nov-2026                17-Feb-2027                  Water
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                Implementing Agency
Investment Project             The Kingdom of Thailand    Royal Irrigation
Financing (IPF)                                           Department

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve flood management and strengthen resilience to water-related climate risks in the Lower Chao Phraya
Basin

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                   1,101.53

  Total Financing                                                                                        1,101.53
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                             610.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                            610.00
  Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Counterpart Funding                                                                                     221.53


                                                                                                                 Page 1



                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)


         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                                                221.53
       Other Sources                                                                                                                       270.00
         Asian Development Bank                                                                                                            140.00
         Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank                                                                                              130.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                  Concept Review Decision
High                                                                          The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 1. This Concept Stage Project Information Document (PID) describes a forthcoming operation to support the Chao
 Phraya flood management engagement in Thailand. This operation will be prepared as the second phase of the East Asia
 and Pacific (EAP) Region’s Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) on Water Security and Resilience (P510359). The
 regional MPA has an overall financing envelope of US$861 million1, and is expected to be approved by the World Bank’s
 Executive Directors on 31 July 2026.


B. Introduction and Context

Regional and Country Context


 2. Water is the cornerstone of development and climate resilience in the EAP region. The EAP region is home to
 over 2.1 billion people and is one of the world's fastest-growing regions. Water security is integral to sustainable
 economic growth, supporting 700 million water-dependent jobs, and is essential for healthy populations, food security,
 and ecosystems2. It is a key driver of economic growth, particularly for agriculture, tourism, and many other sectors,
 including those with high growth potential3. However, climate change impacts exacerbate the mounting challenges of
 water stress, poor infrastructure, and fragmented governance. Three EAP countries (Myanmar, Thailand, and Viet Nam)


 1
     Based on the assumption that the first phase of the MPA will be the Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas
 project (P510359-US$251 million) and the second phase will be this Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631-US$610 million)
  2
    See Water for Shared Prosperity (World Bank, 2024). Water security is defined as “the availability of an acceptable quantity and quality of water
  for health, livelihoods, ecosystems, and production, coupled with an acceptable level of water-related risks to people, environments, and
  economies” (Grey and Sadoff 2007).
 3
    The hidden thirst of AI and other growth potential sectors is exceptionally high in EAP, with a significant rise in water demand due to the growth
 of industries such as data centers and chip manufacturing. This demand comes in addition to existing industries such as semiconductor factories
 relying on water to cool systems and generate electricity globally. They already consume as much water as Hong Kong, a city of 7.5 million. For chip
 manufacturing, ultrapure water is used to remove impurities that can damage chips. An average chip manufacturing facility can use 10 million
 gallons of ultrapure water per day (> 37 million liters/day).

                                                                                                                                                 Page 2



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)


 are often ranked globally among the top 10 countries most aﬀected by climate risks4 – particularly water-related risks –
 having already incurred some of the costliest disasters, with annual losses exceeding US$300 billion. These costs are
 only expected to grow as the number of people and assets exposed to climate hazards increases. For instance, by the
 year 2040, annual climate-change exacerbated flood damage is expected to increase by up to 211 percent in Thailand
 and its neighboring countries due to the expansion or intensification of urban centers (see Figure 1 below), with Bangkok
 being a regional hotspot of costly flood impacts5.

 3. Thailand exemplifies many of the region’s water security challenges: it confronts the challenges of too much, too
 little, and too polluted water, all of which will be exacerbated by climate risks. Thailand is particularly susceptible to
 floods, storms, coastal erosion, water shortages, and heat stress, which translate to significant economic setbacks,
 livelihood disruptions, and profound health impacts of the most vulnerable. Floods are, by far, the most damaging
 climate hazard in Thailand, reflected in its ranking (INFORM index from 2023) as the ninth most exposed country to
 flood hazards in the world. Climate change-induced flooding is projected to result in average annual losses of US$2.6
 billion (0.5 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP)) by 2030, but a 1-in-50-year flood event in 2030 would cost as
 much as 10-15 percent of the national GDP. Business as usual is therefore no longer a viable path, and while the costs
 of required investments are substantial, the costs and risks of inaction are far greater.




Figure 1: Estimated flood damage maps for a 10-year return period for South-east Asia, as well as for (A) Rangoon, (B) Bangkok, (C) Vientiane, (D)
                                          Phnom Penh, and (E) Can Tho. Source: Tierolf et al., 2021

 4. Thailand’s water security and climate-related challenges have played a critical role in stalling its remarkable
 progress in socio-economic development, causing it to fall into a ‘middle-income trap’. Thailand achieved a rapid
 transition from low-income to upper middle-income status within a generation, evolving from an agrarian economy into
 a modern, industrialized, and export oriented one. However, job creation and growth have slowed amid weak


4
  Asean, 2020, The Asian: Climate Change – The Time to Act is Now, https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/The-ASEAN-Magazine-Issue-
5-September-2020.pdf
5
  Tierolf et al., 2021, Modeling urban development and its exposure to river flood risk in Southeast Asia, Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, Vol. 87: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0198971521000272

                                                                                                                                              Page 3



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)


  investment and mounting demographic pressures. High inequality remains a key constraint to sustainable and inclusive
  growth, with Thailand ranking among the most unequal countries globally. Highly monocentric urbanization in Bangkok
  has exacerbated spatial disparities, with rural areas facing greater vulnerabilities. Water insecurity and climate change
  impacts could exacerbate these inequalities and downward trends in socio-economic development; it has been
  estimated that climate change – especially large floods – could reduce Thailand’s GDP by between 7 and 20 percent by
  2050 without proactive measures6. Thailand’s next development phase will therefore require new drivers of jobs and
  growth that strengthen competitiveness, build a future-ready workforce, and expand investment in high-quality and
  climate resilient infrastructure.


Sectoral and Institutional Context


  5. In 2011, Thailand faced unprecedented flooding. The extended monsoon season of 2011 (lasting from June to
  mid-December) resulted in flooding across 65 of the 77 provinces, inundating an area of approximately 4.14 million ha,
  including the Greater Bangkok Metropolitan area, and damaging 1.67 million ha of agricultural land. The 2011 floods
  killed more than 800 people and affected nearly 13 million people across Thailand7. The economic damages amounted
  to approximately Thai Baht (THB)1.43 trillion (US$46.5 billion)8, equivalent to 12.6 percent of Thailand’s GDP at the
  time9. The reconstruction bill alone was THB388 billion, equivalent to 3.4 percent of the GDP. Thailand continues to face
  serious flooding every year, with notable devastations in 2013, 2014, 2016, 2024 and 2025. In November 2025, Thailand
  experienced record rainfall in southern provinces, with floods impacting 2 million people and causing 182 deaths10,11.
  Projections suggest that the number of people affected by floods between 2035–2044 could be 2.5 times higher than
  in 2011, over which period the return periods of major floods will also shorten dramatically due to climate change12.

  6. The 2011 floods stimulated governmental action towards systematic flood management, particularly in the Chao
  Phraya Basin. Spurred by recurring floods, the Government has taken action on comprehensive flood governance and
  master-planning, including the establishment of the Office of National Water Resources (ONWR) in 2017, the adoption
  of the Water Resources Act in 2018, the preparation of a 20-year water resource management masterplan (2018-2037),
  and the Royal Irrigation Department’s (RID) comprehensive Chao Phraya River Flood Risk Management Masterplan13.
  The Chao Phraya basin is Thailand’s largest and most important domestic river system, accounting for 66 percent of the
  national GDP and housing 40 percent of the country’s population. Approximately 90 percent of the Chao Phraya basin
  comprises of agricultural lands, concentrated in the southern part of the basin. The megacity of Bangkok, situated in the
  Chao Phraya delta, contributes around 78 percent of the basin’s share of the national GDP.

 6
   World Bank Thailand Country Climate and Development Report, 2025
 7
   Loc et al., 2023, The Great 2011 Thailand flood disaster revisited: Could it have been mitigated by different dam operations based on better
 weather forecasts?, Environmental Research, 216, 114493: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0013935122018205
 8
   Thai flood 2011: Rapid assessment for resilient recovery and reconstruction planning (Vol. 1 of 2): Overview (English). Washington, DC: World
 Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/677841468335414861
 9
    Dolk et al., 2025, Assessing and managing natural disaster risks for the financial sector in Thailand, World Bank Blogs:
 https://blogs.worldbank.org/en/allaboutfinance/assessing-and-managing-natural-disaster-risks-for-the-financial-
 10
    Kelly Ng, 2025, 'Once in 300 years' rain hits Thai city as floods ravage South East Asia, BBC: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/ckg97wx144jo
 Kocha Olarn and Ross Adkin, 2025, ‘Like a tsunami’: Asia reels from deadly cyclones and monsoon rains, CNN:
https://edition.cnn.com/2025/12/02/asia/thailand-asia-flooding-disaster-intl-hnk
 12
    Climate Risk Country Profile: Thailand (2021): The World Bank Group and the Asian Development Bank.
 13
    Kasetsart University, Feasibility Study and Prioritization of Chao Phraya River Basin Flood Mitigation Plans, Office of National Water Resources,
 Bangkok, September 2020

                                                                                                                                                Page 4



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)



7. The Chao Phraya Flood Management Masterplan consists of nine extensive plans that, when combined, aim to
provide a 1-in-50-year level of flood protection across the Lower Chao Phraya River Basin. These plans have benefited
from extensive studies and have incorporated international best practice to develop a clear roadmap for investments in
flood risk management. The plans (shown in Figure 2) aim to strengthen flood protection and increase the conveyance
capacity (from 3,425 m3/s to 4,295 m3/s) of existing hydraulic infrastructure within an ambitious timeframe of 2024-
202914. The estimated combined cost for all nine plans is US$12.3 billion, and includes: (1) Plan 1: Enhancement of the
lower-eastern basin hydraulic infrastructure (budget ~US$2.75 billion); (2) Plan 2: Construction of Eastern Floodway in
the eastern part of the basin, comprising Chainat-Pasak and Pasak-Gulf of Thailand canals (budget ~US$4.33 billion); (3)
Plan 3: Ring road drainage channel construction (budget ~US$2.33 billion); (4) Plan 4: Hydraulic infrastructure
improvements in the western basin (budget ~US$1.57 billion); (5) Plan 5: Drainage efficiency improvements in the Chao
Phraya River, including the dredging and strengthening of embankments (budget ~US$75 million); (6) Plan 6: Flood
protection and flood management plans, including the construction of shelters in areas not protected by embankments
(budget ~ US$159 million); (7) Plan 7: Drainage channel construction between Bangban and Bangsai (budget ~US$747
million); (8) Plan 8: Drainage efficiency improvements in the Tha Chin River, including dredging and a flood bypass
(budget ~US$66 million); and (9) Plan 9: Inundation area management (budget ~US$107 million). It is important to note
that the numeration of the nine Plans does not imply a requirement for sequential implementation.

8. The implementation of the Chao Phraya Flood Management Masterplan has been challenging, but consensus
and traction have grown in recent years. Two of the nine plans (Plans 6 and 9, which do not include hydraulic
infrastructure investments) have been completed, and Plan 7 is in an advanced construction stage. Implementation of
the most capital-intensive plans did not commence for a long time, due to the constraints of very significant investment
needs, institutional coordination challenges, and frequent changes in the government. In 2024, the Government started
advancing the preparations for Chao Phraya Plan 1, and in 2025 for Plan 2. Feasibility studies and detailed engineering
designs for these investments were prepared in 2017 and updated in 2023, forming the basis for the Government’s
current readiness to start implementation of infrastructure investments.




14
  Kasetsart University, Feasibility Study and Prioritization of Chao Phraya River Basin Flood Mitigation Plans, Office of National Water Resources,
Bangkok, September 2020

                                                                                                                                              Page 5



                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)




Figure 2: The 9 Plans that make up the Chao Phraya Flood Management Masterplan. This PCN covers Phase 1 of Chao Phraya Flood Management
                                                                 Plan 2.

 9. In addition to enhanced flood risk management infrastructure, Thailand also needs to address gaps in its
 hydrometeorological capacity and disaster preparedness. The Thai government has invested in improving forecasting,
 climate‐information services, and early warning systems, especially for flood and drought risks, under the Water
 Resource Management Master Plan 2018-2037. In addition, Thailand has a legal and institutional framework (e.g.,
 Disaster Prevention and Mitigation Act of 2007), local basin‐level plans, and systems for monitoring and responding to
 hydrometeorological hazards. However, several challenges persist. Among these are administrative fragmentation
 (different ministries and agencies collecting overlapping or inconsistent data), limited standardization of data and
 warning protocols, and an underestimation of impacts in official assessments. Forecasting and early‐warning systems
 are still hampered by insufficient observational infrastructure in some areas, delays in data sharing, and limited capacity
 at local levels to interpret and act on warnings. Climate change is increasing the frequency and intensity of extreme
 events, making past models less reliable, increasing uncertainty. Moving forward, the government’s strategy includes
 improving data networks, integrating impact‐based forecasting, enhancing community awareness and local capacity,
 incorporating nature‐based solutions, and better aligning long‐term water management planning with climate change
 projections. Success will depend on securing sustained funding, enhancing cross‐agency coordination, ensuring local
 uptake of early warning and preparedness measures, and keeping pace with rapidly changing climate risks.

 10. The Government of Thailand has requested development partners to support improved flood management and
 climate resilience in the Lower Eastern Chao Phraya Basin. Given the size and complexity of investments, the
 Government has sought support from international development partners. As lead financier for Chao Phraya Flood


                                                                                                                                   Page 6



                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)


Management Plan 2 (Eastern Floodway), the World Bank is currently supporting the preparation of priority investments,
with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) as co-financiers. Similarly,
ADB is the lead financier for Chao Phraya Plan 1 (Lower-eastern basin), with co-financiers including the World Bank, the
Agence Française de Développement, and the OPEC Fund for International Development. Currently, the Chao Phraya
Plan 1 and Plan 2 programs are being prepared in parallel, and it has been agreed that the ADB-World Bank Full Mutual
Reliance Framework (FMRF)15 will be applied to both for facilitating co-financing16. This PCN covers the first operation
(Phase 1) of Chao Phraya Plan 2 (Eastern Floodway) program, and it will be prepared as the second phase of the EAP
regional water security MPA. The Government of Thailand has submitted an official letter of intent (dated May 16, 2025)
to join the EAP regional MPA in support of the Chao Phraya flood management engagement. In December 2025, Thailand
received an allocation of US$2.3 million from the IBRD Grant Facility for Project Preparation (GFPP) for accelerating the
preparation of the Chao Phraya Plan 2 program, with priority on readying its Phase 1 for financing.


Relationship to CPF


11. The Chao Phraya Plan 2 project is closely aligned with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) with Thailand for Fiscal Year (FY) 2019‐2022 (extended to FY2024)17, as well as the drafted CPF for FY2027-2032.
Over the past two years, the Bank has engaged with Thailand to reopen a lending program to support Thailand’s next
phase of development. The WBG’s CPF FY2019–2022 was extended in January 2023 for an additional two years, through
June 30, 2024, following the Performance and Learning Review (Report No. 170788-TH). Discussions are underway for
a new CPF. This Chao Phraya Plan 2 engagement directly underpins two of the six objectives under the CPF, namely: (i)
Objective 3 on strengthening the quality of infrastructure investments; and (ii) Objective 4 on addressing climate change
and improving water resources management.

12. The Chao Phraya flood management engagement is consistent with the World Bank Group Water Strategy
Implementation Plan (WSIP)18, with the Climate Change Action Plan 2021–2025, and the views and priorities laid out
in the Thailand Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR). The Chao Phraya Plan 2 (Eastern Floodway) project
will directly contribute to the pillar on Water for the Planet of the WSIP, through the sixth Scalable Solution on Reducing
Flood and Drought Risk. Additionally, one of the top priority actions identified in the CCDR is the implementation of the
Chao Phraya 9 Plans due to the very high direct impacts and co-benefits in the immediate term. The CCDR calls for the
implementation of the 9 Plans to be complemented by sustainable watershed management through reforestation and
wetland restoration, climate-smart land use planning, floodplain zoning, and expanding and modernizing early warning
systems and hydrometeorological services.


C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

15
   ADB & World Bank. 2025. Asian Development Bank and World Bank: Full Mutual Reliance Framework Agreement.
https://www.adb.org/documents/adb-and-wb-full-mutual-reliance-framework-agreement
16
   ADB’s co-financing of Chao Phraya Plan 2 will be in the same proportion of overall external financing as the WB’s co-financing of Chao Phraya
Plan 1.
17
  Thailand-World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework for the Period 2019-2022 (Thai). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. Report no.
125234.http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/785021552364994356
18
   World Bank. 2025. World Bank Group Water Strategy Implementation Plan: Mission Water for a Water Secure Future (English). Washington, D.C.
World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/099122425094016453

                                                                                                                                           Page 7



                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)



     13. The project development objective (PDO) is to improve flood management and strengthen resilience to water-
     related climate risks in the Lower Chao Phraya Basin.


Key Results (From PCN)

14. The proposed PDO indicators and targets for the first phase of Chao Phraya Plan 2 are:
    a. Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks (World Bank Group Scorecard) (number, tbc)
    b. Area benefiting from reduced flood risk (hectares, tbc)
     Intermediate indicators will be developed during project preparation and will cover citizen engagement, climate
     change, gender, etc., as well as some component-specific indicators, such as:
    c. Length of canals with increased flood drainage capacity (kilometers)
    d. Increased flood conveyance capacity (m3/s)
    e. Beneficiaries covered by more effective flood early-warning systems (number)

D. Concept Description

15. Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (Eastern Floodway) Program: The Chao Phraya Plan 2 will reduce flood
risk by diverting flood flows from the mainstem of the Chao Phraya River and routing them to the Gulf of Thailand,
through the following interventions (see Figure 2):
     a. Increasing the capacity of the existing eastern Chainat-Pasak diversion canal from 130 m3/s to 930 m3/s;
     b. Construction of a new Pasak-Gulf of Thailand canal, with design capacity of 600 m3/s; and
     c. Installation of associated control structures and facilities19.
In addition, the program will invest in technical and institutional capacity strengthening that will improve basin-level
flood modeling and prediction, as well as Early Warning systems and flood response from central to local-level
institutions. The benefit of Chao Phraya Plan 2 has been estimated at approximately US$600 million annually, with
US$533 million per year attributed to flood damage reduction.

16. Chao Phraya Plan 2 - Phase 1: The first phase of Chao Phraya Plan 2 will finance the physical works that are
construction-ready and in compliance with the applicable World Bank policies; institutional strengthening and upgrading
of technical systems; and the preparatory work needed for Phase 2 investments.

17. The first phase of the Chao Phraya Plan 2 will have the following components (Scope and financing presented below
are provisional and subject to revisions):
     a. Component 1: Climate-resilient flood management infrastructure (total cost US$1,051.53 million, GoT
         financing US$221.53 million, External Loan financing US$830 million). This Component will finance physical
         works, associated control structures and systems, and other activities for increasing the flood drainage
         capacity in the eastern Chao Phraya basin. Specifically, it will include:




19
  The existing Rama VI barrage will be upgraded to regulate higher inflows from the Chainat-Pasak canal, and to route them between three possible
trajectories to the sea: (1) via the Pasak River to the downstream reaches of the Chao Phraya River mainstem; (2) via the upgraded Rapeepat canal
network under Plan 1; and (3) via the newly constructed Pasak-Gulf of Thailand canal.

                                                                                                                                            Page 8



                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)


              i.   Capacity-expansion20 in the construction-ready sections of the existing Chainat-Pasak canal, to increase
                   its capacity by 800 m3/s;
            ii.    Construction of selected sections of the new Pasak-Gulf of Thailand canal, with a design capacity of 600
                   m3/s; and
           iii.    Construction and installation of associated control structures and operating systems for the parallel
                   canal system.
         b. Component 2: Strengthened capacity for climate-smart water and flood management (total cost US$20
             million, financed by External Loan/Grant). This component will aim to strengthen the capacity of RID and
             associated institutions in climate-resilient water management, focusing on sustainability, robustness, and
             long-term effectiveness that go beyond the project’s spatial and temporal scope. Among other things, it
             will finance: (i) the modernization and expansion of hydromet and telemetry networks; (ii) the
             upgrading/development of flood forecasting models; (iii) the development of a comprehensive Decision-
             Support System (DSS) for network operations; and (iv) the development of an asset management system
             and a digital operations and maintenance (O&M) planning platform. The component will also support
             interventions to strengthen institutional coordination in the water and emergency management space.
         c. Component 3: Project Management (total cost US$30 million, financed by External Loan). This
             component will support project management and implementation via: (i) technical, environmental, and
             social supervision; (ii) project audits and M&E; (iii) recruitment of a Project Management Consultancy
             (PMC) to support implementation, M&E, FM, environmental and social (E&S) safeguards, and procurement;
             and (iv) establishing a Grievance Mechanism.




                                                       Figure 3: Project Theory of Change



20
  This will include: (i) conversion of the existing earthen irrigation canal (130 m3/s capacity) into a flood drainage channel (800 m3/s capacity) by
deepening and enlarging its cross-sectional area; and (ii) construction of a new irrigation canal (130 m3/s capacity) parallel to the flood drainage
channel - within the existing right of way - to continue serving the irrigation users.

                                                                                                                                                Page 9



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                                      Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



 18. The Environmental risk rating is Substantial, reflecting the large spatial footprint of brownfield construction and
 rehabilitation works for flood management infrastructure (along the Chainat-Pasak Canal) and some greenfield
 construction (along the Pasak-Gulf of Thailand Canal), spanning agricultural, rural, peri-urban, urban, and estuarine
 areas connected to the Gulf of Thailand. Key risks are associated with Component 1, including excavation, dredging,
 vegetation clearance, large earthworks, construction or upgrading of control structures, and relocation or rehabilitation
 of public infrastructure and utilities. Potential impacts include changes in hydrological conditions and downstream
 flows; bank erosion, scouring, and sedimentation at confluence/discharge points; disturbance or loss of terrestrial and
 aquatic habitats; impacts on biodiversity; deterioration of surface water quality due to sediment mobilization; and
 generation of large volumes of spoil and dredged materials. Construction-related impacts such as noise, dust, and traffic
 disruption may affect nearby communities. Additional risks may arise from construction camps, equipment yards, and
 storage of fuels and materials. Occupational and community health and safety risks, particularly related to infrastructure
 relocation, will require careful management. Environmental risks under Component 2 are expected to be low, as
 activities focus on technical systems and institutional strengthening. Overall risks are considered manageable through
 mitigation measures to be defined during project preparation. The risk rating will be revisited as greenfield activities are
 further defined.

 19. Social risk is rated High. Component 1 activities will result in compulsory land acquisition of portions of the Pasak-
 Gulf of Thailand canal and physical and economic displacement of households and businesses within the right of way of
 the existing Chainat-Pasak canal including those without formal land titles. Other risks include labor influx risk; Sexual
 Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) risk; child and forced labor; discrimination in employment of
 women and vulnerable groups; Occupational Health and Safety risks; and community health and safety risks from
 increased traffic and road safety, haulage, water contamination and vector borne diseases during excavation/physical
 works. Some of the existing hydraulic infrastructure is over 90-years old and holds heritage value for Thailand. Civil
 works including canal dredging and widening carry risk of disturbing below-and above-ground heritage sites in the
 project corridor. Diversity and sophistication of affected and interested stakeholders require structured and multi-level
 stakeholder engagement strategies and grievance mechanisms. Exclusion of vulnerable groups in stakeholder
 consultations (e.g. Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer/Questioning, and Intersex + groups, persons with
 disabilities, etc.) is also a potential risk. Public consultations already initiated under the national Environmental Impact
 Assessment process provide a useful foundation for further engagement. The project SEA/SH risk rating has been
 assessed to be Low, and will be reassessed during preparation to develop a proportionate mitigation plan. RID does not

                                                                                                                        Page 10



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)


have prior experience in applying the World Bank or other development partners’ safeguards policies. RID E&S capacity
needs will be included in the project capacity building plan. In addition to the Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan, draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan, Resettlement
Plan(s), and Environmental and Social Commitment Plan will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal. Labor
Management Procedures will be annexed to the ESIA.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Sanjay Pahuja
 Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

 Dzung Huy Nguyen
 Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 The Kingdom of Thailand

Implementing Agencies
 Royal Irrigation Department

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Sanjay Pahuja, Dzung Huy Nguyen

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Maria Angelica Sotomayor               19-Mar-2026

Country/Division Director:               Melinda Good                           08-Apr-2026


                                                                                                                Page 11



                                                                                                         Official Use Only
The World Bank
Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)




                                                       Page 12



                                                Official Use Only
