Public Disclosure Authorized
                                     The World Bank
                                     Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results(P510697)




                                 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public _For
      Disclosure   Authorized
                                                Program Information Document (PID)


            Official Use Only_                   Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Jun-2025 | Report No: PIDPC00184




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results(P510697)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Program Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                     Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                                                                                 Second Community Action
                                                         EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                    for Landscape
                          Ethiopia                                                  P510697
                                                         AFRICA                                                  Management Program for
                                                                                                                 Results
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
                                                                                                                 Environment, Natural
                          Program-for-Results
                                                         07-Oct-2025                12-Dec-2025                  Resources & the Blue
                          Financing (PforR)
                                                                                                                 Economy
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          the Federal Democratic
                                                         Ministry of Agriculture
                          Republic of Ethiopia




_For Official Use Only_
                          Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
                          The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to improve livelihoods by expanding area under sustainable land
                          management practices and securing land tenure in degraded highland areas.

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           To be decided

                          SUMMARY
                            Government program Cost                                                                               1,713.50

                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                  1,706.50
                              Total Program Cost                                                                                  1,691.50
                              IPF Component                                                                                            15.00
                            Total Financing                                                                                       1,706.50

                            Financing Gap                                                                                               0.00



                                                                                                                                         Page 1



                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results(P510697)


                              FINANCING
                                Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                              200.00
                                  World Bank Lending                                                                                          200.00
                                Total Government Contribution                                                                               1,478.00

                                Total Non-World Bank Group Financing                                                                            28.50
                                  Trust Funds                                                                                                  28.50

                              @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
                          Concept Review Decision
                          The review did authorize the preparation to continue




                              B. Introduction and Context




_For Official Use Only_
                              Country Context

                                     1. Ethiopia’s state-led development model produced high growth, improved infrastructure and living
                                        standards. However, the model relied on an overvalued currency, unsustainable debt, and restrictive
                                        regulations that hindered private investment. This weakened competitiveness, fueled inflation, and failed to
                                        generate enough jobs for two million new job seekers annually. Poverty increased from 27 percent to 32
                                        percent between 2016 and 2021 ($2.15/day), with expectations of further increase in subsequent years1;
                                        human capital remained low, and agriculture still employs 70 percent of the workforce. Limited global trade
                                        integration and budget constraints further reduced social and capital spending. Multiple crises, including
                                        COVID-19, the Tigray conflict, and droughts, exacerbated economic imbalances, culminating in a debt default
                                        in late 2023. Double-digit inflation worsened living standards, while the Tigray conflict displaced over three
                                        million people, creating a $20 billion humanitarian and reconstruction need. About 15 million people still rely
                                        on food aid. To stabilize the economy, the government launched macroeconomic reforms in July 2024,
                                        targeting a market-determined exchange rate, easing current account restrictions, and adopting a new
                                        interest rate-based monetary policy. These reforms are supported by a four-year IMF Extended Credit Facility
                                        (ECF) and a Development Policy Financing (DPF) from the World Bank.
                                     2. Ethiopia is highly vulnerable to climate change, with a climate-sensitive economy and low adaptive capacity.
                                        Key climate hazards include extreme temperatures, droughts and extreme precipitation and flooding, all of
                                        which present major risks to ongoing agricultural productivity. The country has faced frequent droughts,
                                        including seven major ones in the past 30 years. Despite reductions in poverty since 2000, these gains are
                                        fragile, and because agriculture supports such a high proportion of the population, climate hazards represent
                                        a major risk to ongoing efforts to reduce poverty. Improving farmers’ adaptative capacity through improved
                                        land management, an increasing focus on biodiversity and shifts in cropping practices offer practical and
                                        effective ways to mitigate climate risks.

                          1
                              World Bank. 2024. Ethiopia Poverty and Equity Assessment. Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                                                                                                                                   Page 2



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results(P510697)


                                3. Land and natural resource degradation in Ethiopia affects millions of rural people, weakening their
                                   resilience to shocks and reducing agricultural productivity. The annual cost of land degradation is estimated
                                   at 2-3% of agricultural GDP, not including downstream effects like increased flood risk. The Government of
                                   Ethiopia's (GoE) Sustainable Land Management Program (SLMP), active since 2008 and now a major pillar of
                                   Ethiopia’s NDC Nationally Determined Contribution, aims to build resilience in the agriculture sector by
                                   addressing land degradation challenges. While sustainable landscape management practices can enhance
                                   resilience, mitigate climate change, and improve livelihoods, the challenge remains large. Ethiopia has made
                                   progress in restoring degraded watersheds. The Ministry of Agriculture’s (MoA’s) approach to sustainable land
                                   management now focuses on a broader ‘landscape’ approach to land management, which it calls ‘Sustainable
                                   Landscape Management’ (SLsM).
                                4. The government has requested this Program to support the second phase of the Ethiopia Strategic
                                   Investment Framework for Sustainable Land and Natural Resources Management (ESIF-2). The first phase
                                   ran from 2008 to 2023. The second phase (ESIF-2), running from 2024 to 2038, provides the GoE’s long-term
                                   strategy for landscape management and restoration efforts and will guide the national program and
                                   framework for sustainable land and natural resources management.
                          Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program

                                5. Land degradation in Ethiopia hampers rural growth and poverty reduction, with 80% of the land prone to
                                   moderate or severe soil degradation. Around 27 million hectares are significantly eroded, affecting one in




_For Official Use Only_
                                   five people, and 14 million hectares are severely eroded, with over 2 million hectares beyond economic
                                   reclamation. Barriers to adopting soil and water conservation practices include land tenure insecurity, limited
                                   technical support, poor community involvement, and weak research-extension links.
                                6. Climate change threatens Ethiopia’s development by worsening land degradation and food insecurity. SLsM
                                   helps communities adapt by capturing rainfall, recharging groundwater, and reducing soil erosion. With
                                   increasing rainfall variability, scaling up SLsM is crucial, as it reduces runoff, boosts infiltration, and enhances
                                   farmer productivity and resilience while also creating opportunities for farmers to increase their incomes from
                                   a broader range of value chains. The World Bank’s Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) for
                                   Ethiopia highlights that investing in SLsM will provide significant development and adaptation benefits,
                                   especially when focused on areas with the highest potential to improve ecosystem services like erosion
                                   control, water regulation, and carbon storage.
                                7. SLsM has proven to be catalytic for job creation by enhancing agricultural productivity, diversifying income,
                                   and improving land quality, thereby increasing employment opportunities in agriculture and related
                                   sectors. Land certification has provided opportunities to develop a land rental market as well as increasing
                                   access to credit using landholdings as collateral. Credit is primarily used for investments that improve farm
                                   households’ productivity and incomes. Additionally, SLsM supports agribusiness value chain development by
                                   improving produce quality and market access, generating employment in production, processing, and
                                   distribution. Positive externalities, such as improved water management in upstream watersheds, benefit
                                   downstream users and protect jobs in water-dependent sectors.
                                8. The proposed Second Community Action for Landscape Management (CALM-2) Program builds on
                                   successful investments and an ongoing Program for Results Operation (CALM, P170384), scaling one of
                                   Africa's largest landscape restoration and land tenure security initiatives. In total (including CALM), this has
                                   now covered 4.8M hectares, 700 highland woredas, 8,000 watersheds, and reaching 11M beneficiaries, it has
                                   achieved annual GHG reductions of 3.3M tonnes of CO2e. Interventions include forest protection, climate-
                                   smart agriculture, biophysical soil and water conservation, and tree planting across 80,000 ha, increasing

                                                                                                                                                  Page 3



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                              The World Bank
                              Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results(P510697)


                                   vegetation cover by 9% in treated areas. Additionally, land rights have been strengthened, with over 3.9
                                   million households receiving certificates, 80% of which include women, and 32,000 landless youth granted
                                   titles. However, due to limitations in the MoA’s previous investment framework (ESIF, 2010–2024), insufficient
                                   attention was paid to restoring degraded forests, agribusiness value chain development, and incentivizing
                                   private sector finance through payments for ecosystem services and/or carbon credits.
                               9. The proposed program will build on the on-going landscape restoration and land tenure results, expanding
                                  these to include restoration of forest areas and communal land tenure certification, while opening new
                                  initiatives to fill the gaps in links to value chains and access to finance, in line with MoA’s updated
                                  investment framework ESIF-2 (2024-2038). Instead of focusing on separate micro-watersheds, the program
                                  will broaden its focus to larger sub-catchments, containing several micro-watersheds. This will allow the
                                  implementation of a more robust and effective landscape approach. CALM-2 will establish mechanisms to
                                  allow restored watersheds to transition from project-based assistance by strengthening value chains,
                                  incentivizing the market for ecosystem services, and enabling private capital flows to communities in restored
                                  watersheds, as well as strengthening linkages between the implementation of community watershed
                                  management plans and other public programs, including soil improvement initiatives and public works under
                                  social protection programs. Farmers will be supported to develop sound business plans for productive
                                  activities, enabling them to capitalize on land certification through improved access to credit, using their
                                  certified landholdings as collateral.
                               10. The proposed program aligns with numerous national policies and strategies. These include Ethiopia’s 10




_For Official Use Only_
                                   Years National Development Plan (10YNDP, 2020-2030), Home Grown Economic Reform Agenda (2019),
                                   Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) strategy (2011), National Adaptation Plan (2021), Nationally
                                   Determined Contributions (2021), and Third National Communication (2022). It supports the national priority
                                   of restoring 30M hectares by 2030 that contributes to Ethiopia's carbon neutrality goals, and international
                                   commitments such as the Bonn Challenge and New York Declaration on Forests.
                               11. The GoE prioritizes gender inclusion in natural resource management, recognizing that women in Ethiopia
                                   face economic, social, and environmental risks. Women farmers produce 23% less than men due to unequal
                                   access to resources, technologies, and decision-making, despite recent efforts to promote women in
                                   leadership. Climate change worsens fuelwood and water scarcity, increasing women's domestic burden.
                                   Female-headed households (26% of rural households) are particularly vulnerable to climate shocks, with
                                   smaller landholdings and weaker tenure rights. Addressing gender issues is key to reversing environmental
                                   and land degradation.
                          Relationship to CAS/CPF
                               12. CALM-2 aligns with the new proposed Ethiopia’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF), particularly
                                   Outcome 4: Resilience as it will increase the number of people with enhanced resilience to climate risks. It
                                   supports natural resource and forest management, scaling up SLM efforts, and improving land tenure through
                                   land use certificates. As a key component of the upcoming CPF, the Program will address food and nutrition
                                   security, build links with agribusiness, foster social cohesion, and enhance climate resilience. It builds on
                                   expertise from previous and ongoing initiatives, including SLMP-I and II (2008-18), the Resilient Landscapes
                                   and Livelihoods Projects (P163383, RLLP and P174385, RLLP-II), Climate Action through Landscape
                                   Management PforR (P170384), and the Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P151294), while
                                   complementing projects like the Lowlands Livelihoods Resilience Project, Phase Two (LLRP2, P180076), which
                                   are financing the restoration of lowlands rangelands.




                                                                                                                                             Page 4



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results(P510697)


                          13. The Program supports priorities in the Global Challenge Paper on Forests and the ‘Livable Planet’ Scorecard, focusing
                              on enhancing resilience, creating more and better jobs, strengthening food security, improving land management,
                              and reducing GHG emissions. It also advances the World Bank Climate Change Action Plan (2021–2025) and aligns with
                              priorities identified in the Country Climate Development Report (CCDR).
                             Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument
                                   14. The proposed hybrid program will be financed through a Program for Results (PforR) instrument
                                       complemented by an Investment Project Financing (IPF) component. The Disbursement Linked Indicators
                                       (DLIs) included under the PforR component will create strong incentives for scaling-up landscape restoration
                                       and land administration interventions, and the activities to be included in the IPF component will support
                                       technical and procurement assistance.
                                   15. Suitability for PforR: Building on the existing CALM PforR program allows for straightforward continuation
                                       of verification and payment systems that are already in place. The MoA’s updated investment framework
                                       (ESIF-2) enables landscape restoration efforts to be scaled up cost-effectively, including by expanding
                                       coverage to forested areas and communal landholdings. ESIF-2 also provides a suitable framework to
                                       incorporate a PforR approach that incentivizes links to income streams from value chains and private capital,
                                       laying the foundation for a sustainable transition away from donor finance.
                                   16. Complementarity of IPF support: CALM implementation revealed select technical and managerial capacity
                                       constraints that PforR finance could not address effectively, such as value-chain development, fiduciary




_For Official Use Only_
                                       systems strengthening, ESMS, land valuation, and remote sensing. The new program will support Ethiopia to
                                       improve its ability to effectively access and utilize carbon finance mechanisms, which is better supported
                                       through technical assistance.

                             C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

                              Program Development Objective(s)


                             The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to improve livelihoods by expanding area under sustainable land
                             management practices and securing land tenure in degraded highland areas.


                             PDO Level Results Indicators

                                   17. The indicators will be set out in the Results Framework, including the Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs).
                                       The Program will be organized under two result areas (RAs): RA#1: Landscape management and restoration;
                                       RA#2: Rural land administration. The PDO-level results indicators are as follows:
                                             •   PDO 1: Area under Sustainable Landscape Management practices (ha)
                                             •   PDO 2: New or better jobs (number)
                                             •   PDO 3: Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks (number)
                                             •   PDO 4: Area of landholdings in targeted areas with strengthened security of tenure registered in the
                                                 National Rural Land Administration Information System (NRLAIS) (ha)
                                             •   PDO 5: Net greenhouse gas emissions (Metric ton per year (tCO2eq/yr).

                                                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results(P510697)



                          D. Program Description

                          PforR Program Boundary

                                 18. The Program will ensure continuation of support to the ESIF program through both PforR and IPF
                                     financing. The Program Boundary covered by the previous CALM operation will be expanded to include
                                     participatory management and restoration of communal forests and grazing lands. The Program’s support
                                     will be provided over a five-year period (FY26–FY31), largely contiguous with the first five years of the ESIF-
                                     2-SLM program.
                                 19. The specific activities eligible for financing under the CALM-2 program will be selected jointly with MoA
                                     during preparation. Preliminary selection has identified continuing with payments linked to the area of
                                     restored land and expanding issuing, digitalizing and registering land certificates to include communal
                                     landholdings. In addition, expanding support for communities following land certification, especially linking
                                     smallholders to value chains, and providing routes to accessing private sector finance. Consistent with the
                                     ongoing operation, the Program boundary for CALM 2 will include support for NRM extension services at
                                     woreda and kebele level and will exclude any SLM practice performed as a mass mobilization scheme where
                                     evidence of voluntary labor participation is unavailable or questionable.
                          E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening




_For Official Use Only_
                                 20. The Program is likely to have positive environmental and social impacts, as its design will follow the
                                     effective practices and approaches developed and refined through CALM, RLLP and previous SLM support
                                     in Ethiopia. Program priorities incentivizing the restoration and rehabilitation of degraded natural
                                     resources, supported by land titling at scale, have been very effective at incentivizing individuals,
                                     households and communities to restore degraded landscapes leading to an increase in land and forest
                                     productivity. This, in turn improves smallholder incomes and food security, expands livelihood choices for
                                     poor rural households, and builds resilience to climate change impacts.

                                21. Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA): The E&S risk rating for the PforR component is
                                    substantial due to geographic scope and various E&S risks including health aspects, security issues, inadequate
                                    consultation, and exclusion of vulnerable groups. Concerns also encompass soil erosion, invasive species,
                                    chemical exposure, physical hazards, and e-waste issues related to IT equipment. Thus, for the PforR part, the
                                    ESSA for the ongoing CALM program will be updated to assess and manage E&S risks and impacts, provide an
                                    exclusion list of activities, and include E&S management capacities at all relevant administrative levels. The
                                    ToR for updating the ESSA will include the IGN and GoE requirements. The federal EPA will be engaged to
                                    assist with the ESSA implementation through capacity building, reviewing audit reports, and monitoring. These
                                    updates will be included in the PAP and reflected in the DLIs as applicable. For IPF activities with moderate
                                    E&S risks and low sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) risk, a Stakeholders Engagement Plan and an
                                    Environmental and Social Commitment Plan addressing labor (with a simple OHS protocol), SEA, and security
                                    management aspects will be prepared, approved by the Bank, and disclosed.


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate



                                                                                                                                                 Page 6



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results(P510697)


                          Legal Operational Policies
                                               Policies                                                     Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No



                           Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component



                                 22. The TA’s environmental and social risk rating is Moderate with moderate environmental and social risks
                                     and low SEA/SH risk. Eight of the ten ESSs (except ESS5 and ESS9) of the WB ESF are relevant to the proposed
                                     IPF component. Description of the ESHS risks to the TA/IPF component and the proportionate mitigation
                                     measures is summarized as follows. The potential environmental, health and safety (EHS) risks are mainly
                                     related to occupational and community health safety risks associated with workers travel; pollution related to
                                     fuel consumption & vehicle emissions; e-waste and associated pollution from the use of remote sensing
                                     technologies; and limited ES coordination related with regulatory agencies/EPAs. Additionally, some of the TA
                                     activities (e.g., preparing Emissions Reductions Program (ERP), SESA for ERP) may have downstream EHS risks




_For Official Use Only_
                                     and impacts, including leakage or displacement due to deforestation and habitat loss outside project areas,
                                     where efforts to prevent deforestation in one area could lead to increased deforestation in surrounding areas.
                                     Similarly, if the TA activities involve downstream resettlement or displacement outside project areas, the
                                     potential impacts and risks should be properly mitigated. To address the potential Social and EHS risks to the
                                     TA support, the ToRs for TA and capacity building activities will integrate the objectives of relevant ESSs to
                                     ensure that activities & outputs are consistent with the WB ESF and ESSs. Overall, the environmental risk is
                                     rated as Moderate at this stage, considering the IPF component of the operation, & will be thoroughly
                                     assessed during the preparation phase. The social risks and impacts relate to proposed IPF component
                                     activities mainly focuses on TA activities, which have a social risk profile no higher than Moderate, based on
                                     the currently available information. The proposed IPF component will not finance any downstream
                                     implementation of the TA activities. The key social risks and impacts of the IPF component identified at this
                                     stage include: (i) potential to create or exacerbate/intensify the existing levels of social discrimination and
                                     exclusion of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, including groups that fall within ESS7, including in areas
                                     like access to benefits from the emission reduction programs and benefit sharing plans (BSPs), facilitated by
                                     an inadequate track record of stakeholder engagement processes and usage of grievance mechanisms; and
                                     (ii) potential small-scale intensification of existing local tensions, and lack of community acceptance of some
                                     activities, particularly in Benishangul and Gambella regions. During the preparation period, these issues and
                                     related benefit sharing and other potential concerns will be thoroughly addressed. At this stage, the potential
                                     Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) risks of the proposed program is classified as
                                     Low, due to the nature and scale of the project, which focuses on activities related to Technical Activities (TA)
                                     support, capacity building, and selected institutional strengthening activities in predominantly Benishangul
                                     and Gembella areas. There will be no potential risk of labor influx anticipated for this program. However, there
                                     could be very limited or low potential risks of SEA/SH due to labor management issues. To effectively address
                                     program-induced SEA/SH risks and impacts, the program will incorporate measures to prevent and manage
                                     SEA/SH risks related into the ESCP. The ESCP will include measures in establishing a SEA/SH responsive GRM,
                                     labor-management, codes of conduct by project workers, and accountability procedures for managing SEA/SH


                                                                                                                                                  Page 7



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results(P510697)


                                    incidents. To effectively assess, manage and monitor the potential environmental, social, health and safety
                                    risks and impacts, the MoA will prepare, consult on & disclose Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
                                    (ESCP) (incorporating SEA/SH, LMP- comprising simple OHS protocol, and security management plan (SMP)
                                    provisions), and a stand alone Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) for the TA activities prior to appraisal. Also,
                                    ToRs for TA activities, consistent with the WB ESF, will be prepared during implementation. SESA for ERP will
                                    be prepared during implementation. The Bank will undertake an Environmental and Social Systems
                                    Assessment (ESSA) for the ES aspects of the PforR, to understand the existing government environmental and
                                    social risk management and identify gap filling measures (which will be supported through the IPF component)
                                    to be incorporated in the program action plan.



                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                          CONTACT POINT

                          World Bank
                           Pablo Cesar Benitez Ponce
                           Lead Natural Resources Management Specialist




_For Official Use Only_
                           Shewakena Aytenfisu Abab
                           Senior Environmental Specialist

                           Million Alemayehu Gizaw
                           Sr Natural Resources Mgmt. Spec.

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
                           Semereta Sewasew
                           State Minister
                           ssewasew@mofed.gov.et

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Ministry of Agriculture
                           Efa Muleta
                           State Minister
                           da@moa.gov.et

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                                                                                                                                                Page 8



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                          The World Bank
                          Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results(P510697)




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                  Page 9



                                                                                                          Official Use Only
