Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 02/05/2026 | Report No: ESRSA04753




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2026                                                                                            Page 1 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym             Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510696                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        InfraDev-Salta                2026

                     Operation Name            Resilient Infrastructure for Regional Economic Development and Job Creation - Salta

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Argentina                 Argentina                                 LATIN AMERICA AND             Transport
                                                                                         CARIBBEAN

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     Province of Salta         Secretariat of Financing and Financial    09-Feb-2026                   24-Mar-2026
                                               Planning, Province of Salta

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     22-Jan-2026               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To enhance access to resilient infrastructure and increase institutional capacity in Salta to support economic
                     development and job creation in mining and related sectors, and to act effectively in case of an eligible crisis or
                     emergency.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project aims to support the development of strategic infrastructure and logistics services in the Province of Salta
                     through four main components: (1) Investment in resilient and safe road infrastructure; (2) Development of logistics
                     centers to serve lithium and other productive sector firms; (3) Investment in critical water and wastewater treatment
                     infrastructure for the local communities; (4) Support to the mining sector by strengthening sustainability, oversight,
                     training, and transparency in mining operations. In addition, the project includes a CERC component and a component
                     focused on Project Management.

                    Feb 07, 2026                                                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)




                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     This Project is an MPA’s second phase aiming at supporting Argentina’s productive sectors representing new sources of
                     growth and contributing to economic diversification. Activities include a) Rehabilitation of a segment of Route N51 (24
                     km between Campo Quijano and los Chorrillos); b) Infrastructure for logistics nodes; c) Improvement of water in
                     Olacapato locality and sanitation in San Antonio de los Cobres); and d) Strengthening mining sector governance and
                     technical capacity. Based on the current Project design, no associated facilities have been identified under the three ESF
                     considerations.
                     The Project will be implemented across urban, industrial, and rural zones within Salta Province. Most interventions are
                     in the Puna region, known for plateaus, mountains, and salt lakes, with a cold, dry climate and scarce water. Vegetation
                     is sparse but adapted, and biodiversity remains rich. The area has moderate to high seismic risk. Specifically, the basic
                     infrastructure investment and planning of the Olacapato logistics node and the water and sanitation infrastructure
                     (Olacapato drinking water plant and new distribution works; and San Antonio de los Cobres wastewater treatment
                     plant), will be located within the Multiple Use Natural Reserve Los Andes. These facilities will be sited in the Reserve's
                     Sustainable Use Zone and Industrial Sector, which are designated as suitable for extractive activities and infrastructure
                     development. It should be noted that the Project will not finance any Reserve management activities.
                     Salta has a high indigenous population density —10% self-identified as Indigenous Peoples (IPs) in the 2022 census,
                     representing at least 14 ethnic groups. Project areas include Kolla and Atacama communities in Los Andes department,
                     Tastil near RN51 Subproject, and no IP communities in the department of Güemes.




Public Disclosure
                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) -Salta Secretariat of Finance and Financial Planning (SFFP)- , has an E&S team
                     that has experience with international financing entities (IADB, FONPLATA, and WB). The E&S team includes an
                     environmental specialist and a social specialist. Salta is recipient of a Grant Facility for Project Preparation (GFPP Grant
                     No. TF0C8847-AR) to facilitate the preparation of the proposed project, including, inter alia, the development of E&S
                     management tools for the Project.
                     The overall E&S responsibility and coordination will rely on the E&S team of the SFFP. This team will work with all
                     relevant government areas, such as Secretariat of Mining and Energy, Secretariat of Public Works, Ministry of
                     Production, the Provincial Roads Directorate (PVD), and Aguas del Norte, among others. In addition, the PIU will lead
                     and coordinate a training plan for the various government entities involved with the subprojects to strengthen
                     institutional local capacity. As this is the first Project for Salta under ESF, institutional capacity on labor management,
                     stakeholder engagement and other environmental and social management skills will continue to be assessed and, if
                     needed, further strengthened during Project implementation.
                     The Salta provincial government has two key entities dedicated to IPs. The Provincial Institute for Indigenous Peoples,
                     led by representatives from various IP communities, focuses on identifying community needs and monitoring policy
                     implementation. The Secretariat for Indigenous Affairs maintains the official registry of IP communities and conducts
                     territorial surveys, working with other government areas to assess project impacts and organize consultations. Under
                     the project, the SFFP will coordinate closely with the Secretariat for Indigenous Affairs on all IP-related activities and
                     with the Secretariat for Women, Gender, and Diversity to promote women’s participation and strengthen mechanisms
                     for preventing Gender-Based Violence (GBV).




                    Feb 07, 2026                                                                                                        Page 3 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The project focuses on strategic investments in transport and logistics, water and sanitation infrastructure, and
                     governance of the mining sector in Salta Province. It involves i) the rehabilitation of an existing road (24k m) (paving,
                     climate resilience improvements, and drainage works associated to flood risk), which would mainly generate
                     disruption due to construction (e.g. dust and noise pollution, air quality effects, etc.), community and occupational
                     health and safety risks, and potential adverse impacts on environmentally sensitive areas within the Puna area and
                     arhaeological heritage sites; ii) earth removal and drainage works, construction of basic infrastructure networks
                     (drinking water, lighting, sanitation, drainage, telecommunications), and tree planting at Güemes node and Industrial
                     Park, as well as infrastructure improvements at the Olacapato node; these could also lead to soil erosion, water
                     contamination from construction runoff, biodiversity impacts, and habitat disturbance; iii) water and wastewater
                     treatment infrastructure in Olacapato and San Antonio de los Cobres, which additional risks of water exploitation and
                     pollution and disruption to local ecosystems. Although large infrastructure is not envisaged and these risks and
                     impacts are considered manageable with standard mitigation measures, the environmental risk is classified
                     substantial at this stage because i) the Puna area is highly sensitivity to environmental pressures, and ii) potential
                     indirect and/or cumulative impacts on biodiversity and water quality and quantity could occur as a result of the
                     promotion of mining and other development activities, and increased traffic in the rehabilitated road. The project’s
                     E&S assessments will analyze all these effects and provide appropriate measures for the design and construction of



Public Disclosure
                     the activities in accordance with the ESF and the ‘mitigation hierarchy’ approach. E&S capacity development
                     initiatives will be part of this project with a focus on cumulative and synergic impacts, water management,
                     biodiversity and habitats protection, consultation, strategic communication and conflict resolution.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project aims to strengthen development corridors in Salta, Argentina, through strategic infrastructure
                     investments. These include the rehabilitation of RN51, the construction of logistics nodes in General Güemes and
                     Olacapato, water and sanitation improvements in the Puna region, and technical support to the mining sector. The
                     social risk rating for the project is Substantial. The rating reflects several interconnected challenges. Labor influx
                     during construction may lead to social tensions and increase risks of sexual exploitation, abuse and sexual harassment
                     (SEA/SH). As stated above, there are also risks of water exploitation and pollution and disruption to local ecosystems
                     associated with wastewater treatment infrastructure in Olacapato and San Antonio de los Cobres. Additionally, at the
                     medium term the presence of Indigenous Peoples (IPs)—combined with high poverty levels and unmet basic needs—
                     heightens the risk of inequitable benefit distribution. In addition, although most works are planned along existing
                     roads or on fiscal land to minimize land acquisition, the rehabilitation of RN51 and the construction of logistics nodes
                     may nonetheless require land acquisition, potentially leading to physical and/or economic displacement. The ESMF
                     includes a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address this scenario, providing guidance on the preparation of
                     Resettlement Plans should the need be confirmed. Finally, while the mining component is designed to deliver positive
                     outcomes, there is a prevailing perception that all infrastructure financed under this operation will primarily promote
                     mining production in the province. This perception could generate concerns among certain local stakeholders—
                     particularly those opposed to mining activities—and influence the overall social context. The Province of Salta has


                    Feb 07, 2026                                                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                     carried out consultations on the selected subprojects in the Puna Region since 2019, and the first Project-wide
                     consultation was held on January 7, 2026, in San Antonio de los Cobres. Stakeholders from municipalities, Indigenous
                     Peoples, civil society organizations, and the private sector expressed strong interest in the proposed investments and
                     emphasized that these works are both needed and expected. During the consultation, the PIU also addressed
                     stakeholders’ concerns and provided information on the Project’s Grievance Mechanism (GM). While the social risk
                     rating had been recommended to increase from Substantial to High at Concept Review due to stakeholder risk, the
                     outcomes of the January 7 consultation support reverting both the stakeholder risk and the overall social risk rating
                     back to Substantial at Appraisal stage. The need for Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) for the Olacapato
                     Logistics Node have been thoroughly discussed with the Province of Salta. The Secretariat of Indigenous Affairs
                     previously carried out a free, prior, and informed consultation process for this subproject. However, as the Logistics
                     Node is located on land under customary use by Indigenous Peoples according to the National Registry of Indigenous
                     Peoples’ Land, the Project will be required to obtain FPIC in accordance with ESS7. This process will follow the
                     procedures set out in the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and reflected in the ESMF, ensuring that
                     Indigenous Peoples’ concerns are fully addressed and that any decisions related to the subproject are taken with their
                     free, prior, and informed consent. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will address remaining risks, ensuring
                     inclusive consultations with vulnerable groups and stakeholders, particularly those sensitive to mining activities.
                     Stated risks will also be mitigated through comprehensive Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and
                     a dedicated SEA/SH Action Plan. As stated above, the ESMF will also include a Resettlement Planning Framwork (RPF),
                     as well as a Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF).


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered



Public Disclosure
                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      Activities assessed during preparation for potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and impactsconsider, risks of
                      exclusion from project benefits for Indigenous Peoples and other vulnerable groups, as well as potential direct and
                      indirect impacts resulting from the promotion of development activities. The borrower has prepared a draft
                      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Environmental and Social Assessments (ESAs)
                      proportionate to the nature, scale, and scope of the planned investments. Measures aligned with the mitigation
                      hierarchy have been designed to address any significant risks and impacts. Continuous monitoring and reporting will
                      ensure compliance with E&S instruments and the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), as appropriate.
                      Site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Environmental and Social Management Plans
                      (ESMPs) for RN51 rehabilitation, the water infrastructure in Olacapato, the wastewater treatment plant in San
                      Antonio de los Cobres, the Güemes Logistic Node and the Olacapato Logistic Node are currently being tendered with
                      funds from the GFPP following ToRs acceptable to the Bank. All contractor agreements will incorporate E&S
                      requirements, and adaptive management will be applied to address emerging or unforeseen issues. The project will
                      adhere to the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), EHS Guidelines, Good International Industry Practice (GIIP),
                      and applicable local regulations. ESF principles will also apply to technical assistance activities with potential
                      downstream E&S risks.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant


                    Feb 07, 2026                                                                                                    Page 5 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                      A draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared, including an analysis to identify Project-Affected
                      Parties—such as vulnerable groups and other interested stakeholders— considering risks and direct and indirect
                      impacts related to mining development, transport, water management, Indigenous Peoples, and biodiversity. The SEP
                      guides engagement throughout all project phases, ensuring inclusive consultations and culturally appropriate
                      feedback mechanisms. Previous consultations on E&S impact assessments for the logistics nodes conducted by the
                      Province since 2019 have been reviewed and complementary consultations will be developed during implementation
                      to align with ESF requirements. The SEP also considers an existing engagement strategy from the Ministry of
                      Production and the Secretariat of Indigenous Affairs focused on a continuous dialogue with indigenous and local
                      communities in the Puna region and mining companies (Mesa de Trabajo Social Minera). This roundtable is a
                      consolidated space that helped the Province and the private sector to strengthen bonds with communities in the
                      Puna, listen to their demands and coordinate efforts. The first consultation exercise on the Project as a whole was
                      held on January 7, 2026, in San Antonio de los Cobres, with participation of authorities from all involved
                      municipalities, IP leaders, civil society organizations and mining companies. The participants expressed strong interest
                      and eagerness for works to begin, emphasizing that these investments are both wanted and needed, and raised
                      questions regarding: the Project’s timeline; the creation of local employment and measures to prioritize it; the
                      specific location of the wastewater treatment plant and the Olacapato Node; the environmental management of
                      Subprojects, particularly in relation to solid waste management and water use at the Logistic Nodes; and planned
                      stakeholder engagement activities for local communities. The PIU answered all questions with the available
                      information, communicating that there will be further consultations on each Subproject and their corresponding
                      ESIAs/ESMPs at a local level and inviting participants to contact them if they have further concerns. The SEP includes
                      a Grievance Mechanism (GM) with channels at the provincial and Subproject level, that provides accessible,




Public Disclosure
                      confidential, culturally appropriate, inclusive and transparent grievance resolution, including an appeals process,
                      paying particular attention to the needs and interests of Indigenous and other vulnerable groups. The SEP also
                      describes how stakeholder inputs will be documented and acted upon. The PIU will lead SEP implementation,
                      ensuring adequate resources, staff and contractors training and monitoring, and robust communication strategies.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      The Project will be implemented by public servants (from Secretariat of Finance and Financial Planning, Secretariat of
                      Mining and Energy, Secretariat of Public Works, Provincial Roads Directorate, and Aguas del Norte), direct (individual
                      consultancies), and contracted workers (contractors for civil works related to road, logistics nodes, and
                      water/sanitation infrastructure). According to the WB Overview Assessment, the applicable local legal framework is in
                      general materially consistent to the requirements of ESS2. There are minor gaps related to the availability of GMs for
                      workers and the need to enforce the prevention of Gender Based Violence. Therefore, additional measures have
                      been included in the ESCP and in the ESMF, which includes guidelines for a specific GMs for project workers and a
                      modelo of code of conduct that includes SEA/SH prevention. Also the ToRs for the ESIAs/ESMPs, financed through the
                      preparation grant, incorporate the requirement to develop Labor Management Plans as integral components of the
                      ESMPs, thereby ensuring that both requisites are fully addressed. Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) aspects are
                      incorporated in the ESCP, the ESMF, and the subprojects ESMPs. The ESCP also stresses the need to ensure the
                      implementation of actions that are considered in the national framework, as to provide Project workers information
                      of their labor conditions, to prevent the use of all forms of forced labor and child labor; and to provide workers with
                      effective freedom to form and join workers organizations or alternative mechanisms for expressing their concerns
                      and protect their rights related to labor and working conditions.


                    Feb 07, 2026                                                                                                     Page 6 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      The project involves infrastructure rehabilitation and construction activities, particularly road works and development
                      of logistics nodes and water/wastewater infrastructure. These activities will consume resources (e.g., energy, water,
                      raw materials) and generate waste and emissions. Particularly, the project poses potential risks to water quality and
                      quantity considering freshwater scarcity in Puna region. The assessment in the draft ESMF includes i) energy
                      efficiency measures, ii) water efficiency measures (including actions to minimize and monitor water use,
                      implementation of adaptive management measures if water resources become stressed, and assessment of long-
                      term water sustainability under climate change scenarios and future demand projections), iii) management of
                      construction and operational waste, iv) control of air emissions.. Resource efficiency and pollution prevention
                      measures will be managed in line with WBG EHS Guidelines and GIIP as well as local legislation, whichever are more
                      stringent in any specific context. Other mitigation measures are also included in the ESMF following the mitigation
                      hierarchy and will be detailed in the subproject's ESMPs. GHG emissions were assessed during project preparation.
                      The road component shows an increase in emissions from a baseline of 152,969 tCO₂ to 183,197 tCO₂ post-upgrade
                      due to higher traffic volumes. These additional emissions are offset by reductions from the logistics hubs through a
                      modal shift to rail. Overall, the project results in gross emissions of 265,763 tCO₂ and net emissions of −172,143 tCO₂
                      (−8,607 tCO₂/year). Despite the net reduction, mitigation measures to minimize road-related emissions are
                      incorporated in the ESMF and ESIA ToR for the road subproject.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant to this project due to the planned infrastructure works. Key potential community health and safety



Public Disclosure
                      risks include construction-related impacts (noise, dust, traffic), increased traffic and road safety risks, potential
                      impacts from labor influx, and risks associated with water and sanitation infrastructure. Thus, the draft ESMF contains
                      specific measures to ensure that appropriate mitigation measures are in place, including signage and fencing, where
                      appropriate; planning and communication of diversions; presence of road safety personnel; speed limit reduction,
                      among others. In addition, potential impacts such as higher rates of GBV, HIV/AIDS transmission, social tensions, and
                      disruption of community cultural values due to the increase influx of workers are also addressed under the SEP and
                      ESMF, with corresponding mitigation measures in speciific ESMPs. The application of universal accessibility in the
                      design of project activities will continuously recommended and explored.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      ESS5 is applicable as the project may involve land acquisition, particularly for the rehabilitation of RN51 and the
                      development of logistics nodes and water and sanitation infrastructure, which could lead to physical and/or economic
                      displacement. Major impacts are not anticipated at the appraisal stage since RN51 works will occur along existing
                      roadways, and logistics nodes as well as water and sanitation infrastructure will be developed on fiscal land. The
                      project will prioritize avoiding and minimizing displacement. However, the ESMF includes a RPF with provisions to
                      address gaps between national and provincial frameworks and ESS5 requirements, ensuring that site-specific
                      Resettlement Plans (RPs) are prepared if needed. The PIU will prepare, consult, disclose and implement this RPF
                      within 3 months of effectiveness and prior to any site access or bidding. The RPs must ensure that: i) affected people,
                      including people without legal rights to land or assets, are consulted on compensation alternatives, ii) total
                      compensation at full replacement cost prior to any displacement has been provided, and iii) displaced persons have
                      been resettled and moving allowances have been provided before taking possession of the land and related assets,


                    Feb 07, 2026                                                                                                    Page 7 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                      particularly for vulnerable groups, in a manner consistent with the principles, guidelines, and procedures set in ESS5.
                      As set in the ESS7 paragraph, If land acquisition restrictions have adverse impacts on lands used/occupied by
                      indigenous communities, the project will apply FPIC. Additionally, the implementing agency’s capacity will be
                      assessed and strengthened as necessary to ensure effective compliance.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                  Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project poses potential risks to biodiversity and habitats, particularly activities within the Multiple Use Natural
                      Reserve Los Andes and Quebrada del Toro area. While most work is planned for already modified areas, the unique
                      and fragile Puna ecosystem—with its endemic species—demands careful assessment of all potential direct, indirect,
                      synergic and cumulative impacts. Key potential biodiversity issues include impacts on vulnerable species and habitats
                      due to construction activities and potential disturbance to local fauna. The Environmental and Social Management
                      Framework (ESMF), currently in draft version, includes guideliness for the avoidance, reduction, and mitigation of
                      negative effects on biodiversity during both construction and operation. The SEP guides stakeholder engagement
                      including stakeholders related to biodiversity issues. Site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans
                      (ESMPs) will detail tailored measures to safeguard critical or sensitive species and habitats if needed, ensuring
                      comprehensive biodiversity protection throughout the project’s implementation.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                             Relevant
                      Local Communities




Public Disclosure
                      The Project will prioritize measures to avoid and mitigate adverse impacts while ensuring equitable benefit sharing
                      for Indigenous Peoples (IPs) within the implementation area. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will
                      be prepared and included as an annex of the ESMF no later than three months after the Effective Date. The IPPF will
                      outline the approach for inclusive and gender sensitive consultations with customary institutions, define culturally
                      appropriate Grievance Mechanism (GM) measures, and guide the preparation of specific Indigenous Peoples Plans
                      (IPPs) for subprojects located in areas of influence where Indigenous communities are present. The IPPF will also
                      guide the process to obtain Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC), in accordance with ESS7 and as reflected in the
                      ESCP. The social assessment confirmed the presence of Kolla and Atacama communities in the Los Andes
                      department—where the water and sanitation works and the Olacapato Logistics Node will be implemented—as well
                      as Tastil communities near the RN51 subproject. There are no IPs present in Güemes department and activities to
                      strengthen mining sector governance and technical capacity do not involve actions on the ground (as drilling,
                      extraction or sampling) that could impact on tangible and intangible cultural heritage and lands/resources used by IP
                      communities. Although the land designated for the Olacapato node is formally owned by the Province of Salta, the
                      National Registry of Indigenous Peoples’ Land has certified that it forms part of a broader territory customarily used
                      by a Kolla community from Olacapato. Given that the Logistics Node will be developed on customary use land, the
                      Project will be required to obtain Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) from the affected community before
                      carrying out any relevant works or actions of this subproject, as stipulated in the ESCP. The Province of Salta has been
                      implementing a free, prior, and informed consultation process with the community since 2019, in accordance with
                      provincial and national regulations and ILO Convention 169. During this engagement, the community expressed: (i)
                      demands for improved water and sanitation services—which will be addressed jointly by this Project and the
                      FONPLATA funded operation; (ii) concerns regarding environmental oversight of companies operating in the Logistics
                      Node—which will be monitored by the provincial Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable Development with


                    Feb 07, 2026                                                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                      community participation; (iii) requests for local employment opportunities in mining companies and businesses
                      operating in the Node—which will be followed through the Mesa de Trabajo Social Minera; and (iv) a proposal to
                      receive a share of the Node’s benefits—which the Province is assessing. These priorities will be incorporated into the
                      measures defined in the corresponding IPP, consulted as part of the FPIC process and implemented throughout the
                      Project cycle. If any other Project action includes one or more of the three circumstances requiring FPIC defined in
                      ESS7, the PIU will prepare and implement particular FPIC processes, following the guidance included in the IPPF. The
                      PIU, that has a social specialist with experience in working with IPs in the Puna Region, will implement the IPPF and
                      IPPs in coordination with the provincial Secretary of Indigenous Affairs, that has a longstanding work with IP
                      communities and their leaders. Communities in Salta choose their leaders regularly and update them in the provincial
                      registry of communities. Consultation process with communities include dialog with IP leaders, participation in
                      community assemblies and registration of the process in shared minutes that are filed in official records.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      Project activities will be developed in areas that may contain cultural heritage sites. The ESMF assess potential risks
                      and impacts from project infrastructure on cultural heritage, particularly on the tangible and intangible cultural
                      heritage of IPs and other vulnerable groups. This assessment will continued to be informed by consultations with
                      these groups, and with cultural heritage experts at a subproject level. The ESMF, includes provisions for ESMPs on
                      developing: (i) Chance Finds procedures for the construction areas that will include clauses requiring civil contractors
                      to take proper protective measures in case cultural heritage sites are discovered, including to stop construction
                      activities if cultural property sites are found during construction; and (ii) any needed mitigation measures to avoid
                      impacts or restore community cultural sites. All site-specific ESMP measures will be reflected in corresponding



Public Disclosure
                      construction contracts and also in accordance to local legislation. As stated in ESS7 paragraph, activities to strengthen
                      mining sector governance and technical capacity do not involve actions on the ground (as drilling, extraction or
                      sampling) that could impact on tangible and intangible cultural heritage and lands/resources used by IP communities.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      The standard is not relevant. The project will not involve any financial intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                         In Part
                       The WB Overview Assessment included an assessment of Salta’s legal and institutional framework for E&S
                       management (https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-
                       reports/documentdetail/099707007022538679). Regarding ESS2, laws and regulations have been considered
                       appropriate to cover most risks and impacts associated with operations, and activities will be managed relying on
                       national and provincial requirements. Additional actions are included in the ESCP to reinforce and ensure the relevant


                    Feb 07, 2026                                                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                       WB’s E&S Standards, requiring the borrower to promptly notify the Bank of any changes to the Borrower E&S
                       management framework that may materially adversely affect the Borrower’s ability to manage ESS2 risks and impacts
                       and the measures to address said changes. Also, the ESCP includes complementary measures such as a specific GMs
                       for project workers and a code of conduct that includes SEA/SH prevention.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                       There will not be financing partners related to this project. Nonetheless, the province is working in parallel financing
                       with IADB and FONPLATA. A common approach for the management of the environmental and social risks associated
                       with the Project is not required. Nonetheless, the three banks (WB, FONPLATA and IADB) agreed to find ways to
                       simplify and unify criteria for drafting E&S management instruments and developing consultations, in a manner that
                       ensures consistency with objectives of the ESF.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The Borrower has prepared draft versions of the ESMF and the SEP. As set out in the ESCP, final versions of the SEP and
                     the ESMF will be completed and disclosed no later than three months after the Effective Date, together with the
                     Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and the SEA/SH Action Plan,
                     all of which will form part of the ESMF. Resettlement Plans (RPs), if required, will be prepared and disclosed prior to
                     launching the bidding processes for any subprojects that may generate adverse impacts related to involuntary



Public Disclosure
                     resettlement. The same timeline will be applied to Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) in all subprojects with presence of
                     IPs in their area of influence.

                     The following Environmental and Social Assessments will be prepared using GFPP funding during the project’s early
                     implementation phases. All requirements are consistent with the draft ESMF, and the assessments will adhere to the
                     principles of the ESF.
                     •       E&S impact assessment for RN51
                     •       E&S impact assessment for water infrastructure in Olacapato
                     •       E&S impact assessment for the wastewater treatment plant in San Antonio de los Cobres
                     •       E&S impact assessment for the Güemes Logistic Node
                     •       E&S impact assessment for the Olacapato Logistic Node

                     When applicable, the ESF principles will apply to those TA activities with potential of downstream impacts.

                     All these assessments and analysis will take into account the following E&S assessments already conducted by Salta:
                     •        Environmental Impact Report for the Güemes Logistics Node and Dry Port (2022)
                     •        Environmental, Social, and Economic Impact Study for the Development of the Industrial Area, Logistics, and
                     Services in Cauchari, Department of Los Andes - Salta (Nov 2019)




                    Feb 07, 2026                                                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Infrastructure For Regional Economic Development And Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Aiga Stokenberga                       Title:          Senior Transport Economist

                      Email:                  astokenberga@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Javier Aguilar                         Job Title:      Senior Mining Specialist

                      Email:                  jaguilar@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL




Public Disclosure
                     Task Team Leader(s):                                        Aiga Stokenberga, Javier Aguilar

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                               Lucia Rossi

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                      Maria Lucrecia Bertelli




                    Feb 07, 2026                                                                                                  Page 11 of 11
