Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Bioeconomy And Sustainable Regional Development Project (P510383)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 10/15/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05217




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 23, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Bioeconomy And Sustainable Regional Development Project (P510383)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510383                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      BioReg MIDR                 2027

                     Operation Name            Bioeconomy and Sustainable Regional Development project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Brazil                    Brazil                                  LATIN AMERICA AND           Environment, Natural
                                                                                       CARIBBEAN                   Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                   Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Federal Government        Ministry of Integration and Regional    20-Apr-2026                 30-Jul-2026
                     of Brazil                 Development MIDR

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     13-Oct-2025               705,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Expand access to finance to promote inclusive economic development and climate resilience in lagging regions of Brazil


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed Project is a financial intermediary project that seeks to expand access to finance for activities that
                     promote the bioeconomy, sustainable agricultural practices, restoration of degraded forests and pasture, and water
                     security. The Project will be implemented by the Ministry of Integration and Regional Development (MIDR), through the
                     3 Regional Development Funds for the North (FDNO), the Northeast (FDNE) and the Center-West (FDCO) regions.
                     Financial products will be channeled through participating public financial institutions, that will act as financial
                     intermediaries in delivering subloans. MIDR will coordinate these efforts, through its 3 superintendencies, capitalizing
                     on the banks’ extensive networks to reach eligible borrowers efficiently. The Development Funds finance strategic

                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Bioeconomy And Sustainable Regional Development Project (P510383)



                     private investments aligned with regional priorities and national development objectives, in underserved regions. The
                     Project aims to close the persistent gap between demand for long-term credit and the limited availability of
                     concessional financing. Targeted investments will include bioeconomy value chains, sustainable forest concessions,
                     climate-smart agriculture, and improvements in water supply, sanitation, and irrigation systems. By doing so, the
                     Project also seeks to enhance the economic and climate resilience of targeted beneficiaries (private sector actors,
                     cooperatives, farmers and local entrepreneurs). The proposed project consists of two components: (1) Credit lines for
                     FDNO, FDNE and FDCO to finance blue (WSS and irrigation) and green sectors (forest, Climate-Smart Agriculture,
                     bioeconomy) and (2) Capacity Building and Project Management .


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Development Funds (FDA, FDNE and FDCO) participate in the financing of large and diverse projects that generate
                     jobs, taxes, and income for various municipalities in Brazil. Each fund has its own area of coverage. FDCO operates
                     throughout the Central-West Region (Federal District and the states of Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, and Goiás).
                     FDNE, in turn, operates in the states of the Northeast region (Alagoas, Bahia, Ceará, Maranhão, Paraíba, Pernambuco,
                     Piauí, Rio Grande do Norte, and Sergipe), as well as part of the states of Minas Gerais and Espírito Santo. And FDA aims
                     to finance the implementation of projects that attract investment to the Legal Amazon (Acre, Amapá, Amazonas,
                     Maranhão, Mato Grosso, Pará, Rondônia, Roraima e Tocantins).

                     The Brazilian Legal Amazon covers approx. 5 million km2. It is home to about 60% of the world's tropical rainforests and
                     contains around 10% of the planet's known species. Deforestation is a huge challenge in the region, mostly driven by



Public Disclosure
                     agricultural expansion, logging, and infrastructure development, posing significant threats to the ecosystems and
                     biodiversity. Indigenous peoples play a crucial role in the region, with approximately 145,000 indigenous individuals
                     residing there. In the Central-Weste region, the Cerrado is the most prevalent biome, spanning over 203 million ha,
                     which represents 24% of Brazil's territory. Approximately 25 million people live in the region, with low population
                     density in rural areas. Its flat lands, regular rains, and tropical climate have made it a hub for agricultural growth. The
                     Northeast, on the other hand, faces several economic, environmental, climate-related, and social adversities. The region
                     stands out with the largest installed capacity of variable renewable energy. The semi-arid climate predominates in the
                     region with low rainfall and water scarcity. With an average Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.663, the region
                     remains one of the poorest and most unequal regions in Brazil.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of Integration and Regional Development (MIDR) will host a Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) and will be
                     responsible for overall management, planning, coordination, monitoring and evaluation of all project activities, as well
                     as for implementing the social and environmental risk management instruments and disseminating project results
                     through a proactive communication strategy. MIDR will be supported by the 3 Superintendencies (SUDENE, SUDAM,
                     and SUDECO) – managers of each of the Development Funds – that will act as Project Implementing Units (PIU). The
                     financial products will be channeled through Participating Public Development Banks (PPDBs), that will act as financial
                     intermediaries in delivering sub-loans. Although MIDR and its respective Superintendencies do not have recent
                     experience in projects with the World Bank, the ministry is currently involved in similar programs that are being
                     prepared with other MDBs, i.e., IDB and NDB, which will contribute to institutional capacity building. MIDR has
                     experience and a long history of implementing various structural and challenging projects in Brazil. Within the scope of
                     the project, operational responsibilities will be managed by the operating banks, which, in line with the Central Bank's

                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Bioeconomy And Sustainable Regional Development Project (P510383)



                     regulations, have a defined structure for assessing and managing the E&S risks of financed projects. All operating banks
                     currently selected to operate the funds (BNDES, BASA, BNB and BB) have already been preliminarily evaluated by the
                     World Bank in connection with other IPFs and have the key elements required by ESS9. During the preparation phase,
                     the Bank will work with MIDR and its superintendents to identify the areas that need to be strengthened in terms of
                     training, capacity building, and capacity creation for managing the Project's E&S risks, in addition to developing
                     appropriate systems for monitoring and supervision, aligned not only with the World Bank project but also with MIDR's
                     current portfolio.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial
                     The environmental risk is Substantial. Key potential E&S risks and impacts will most likely be associated with the
                     implementation of water supply and sanitation, and irrigation systems, and forest concessions. Other potential
                     environmental impacts are expected from bioeconomy value chains and climate-smart agriculture (CSA) activities;
                     however, these are expected to be lower, at a moderate scale. Civil works will include the generation and waste,
                     effluents, water pollution from construction runoff, noise, vibration and air emissions. The operation of water supply
                     and sanitation systems may include risks related to sludges generation and other wastes from filters, sedimentation,
                     and flotation tanks. Irrigation systems may cause impacts on water depletion from over-extraction, soil degradation
                     through salinization and waterlogging, and water pollution from agricultural runoff carrying sediments, nutrients, and



Public Disclosure
                     pesticides into aquifers and waterways. Irrigation systems might rely on existing dams, which could entail dam safety
                     issues. Sustainable forest concessions may lead to potential impacts including soil erosion, habitat disruption,
                     increased vulnerability to forest fires, and land tenure conflicts, particularly with inadequate planning and no use of
                     appropriate certification. Bioeconomy and CSA impacts are diffuse coming from agricultural production i.e., soil
                     erosion, habitat conversion, pesticides contamination, and could encompass cumulative and indirect impacts on
                     natural/critical habitats. Bioeconomy might cause deforestation and land use change, leading to habitat loss and
                     reduced biodiversity. While impacts related to habitat loss may permanently affect target species of fauna/flora if not
                     addressed adequately, most other potential adverse impacts are site specific, temporary, reversible and could be
                     mitigated by the adoption of GIIPs, and Brazilian legal framework which relies on solid requirements for E&S impact
                     assessment and licensing process.
                                                                                                                                  Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project, centered on regional development and sustainable value chains, carries a substantial social risk. While
                     promoting economic inclusion for vulnerable groups, it also poses potential social impacts that require adequate
                     management tools, given its broad reach through regional agencies and development banks. The borrower will be the
                     Federal Government through the MIDR which will support the strengthening of the Development Funds (FDCO, FDNE,
                     FDA), managed through the regional Superintendence (SUDAM, SUDENE, SUDECO), and these will be operationalized
                     via Participating Public Development Banks (PPDBs). Sub loans will be provided to eligible private actors, cooperatives
                     and local entrepreneurs, through Public Banks that have been previously assessed by the team and meet the
                     requirements in accordance with ESS 9, such as Banco do Brasil, BNDES and others. Project activities, such as value
                     chain support and infrastructure, may require land use changes and could impact local communities, which could


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Bioeconomy And Sustainable Regional Development Project (P510383)



                     necessitate land acquisition and lead to physical and/or economic displacement. The project activities may support
                     subprojects located within the buffer zones of demarcated or under demarcation indigenous lands or may benefit
                     indigenous peoples, exclusively or predominantly. Targeting vulnerable groups, the project aims to improve water
                     and sanitation access, which benefits indigenous and traditional communities and requires culturally appropriate
                     engagement. Job creation efforts may lead to labor influx and social tensions, with risks such as GBV and SEA/SH.
                     Monitoring sub-borrowers’ compliance with environmental and social standards may also be challenging, especially in
                     cases where the nature of the subproject does not require environmental licensing.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The key environmental and social risks and impacts are the ones mainly associated with medium-large scale civil
                      works, as in the potential investments in irrigation and sanitation projects. Considering the complexity of the program
                      and the diversity of actors, sectors and activities to be developed, the borrower (MIDR), with assistance from the
                      World Bank, will prepare an E&S Management Manual (ESMM) that, besides providing for the overall assessment of
                      the project’s E&S risks and impacts, will outline the principles, rules, guidelines, exclusion list, and plans, to avoid,
                      minimize, mitigate negative impacts and enhance positive ones. It will also indicate E&S requirements for the PPDBs
                      and their existing ESMSs , and determine the requirements and responsibilities of the involved institutions at the
                      stages of the implementation flow and ensure monitoring and reporting within the deadlines as per the ESCP. High-



Public Disclosure
                      risk interventions will be included in the Project’s exclusion list.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      The MIDR will prepare a SEP that incorporates procedures and channels from Constitutional Fund operators, using
                      the governance structures of the Superintendencies SUDAM, SUDENE, and SUDECO and the Deliberative Councils of
                      the Funds (FDA, FDCO, and FDNE). These Development Funds follow legal rules requiring participatory annual plans,
                      which are reviewed and approved by Deliberative Councils representing government, private sector, and civil society,
                      including worker organizations. The SEP will outline responsibilities for stakeholder engagement and grievance
                      mechanisms at both MIDR and FI levels. MIDR and Superintendencies will manage SEP activities, while FIs will handle
                      their specific mandates, being informed of their duties, including GM and risk-based engagement. An advanced draft
                      SEP will be prepared and disclosed by Appraisal. The gaps in stakeholder engagement and grievance mechanisms will
                      be identified and addressed, including may concerns raised by high-level stakeholders.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      This standard is relevant under the proposed activities. The ESS2 applies to the MIDR, SUDENE, SUDAM and SUDECO
                      as well as to the second tier FIs. Borrower will require FIs to establish grievance mechanisms for their own workers.
                      The Project will mostly involve direct workers, mainly Government Civil Servants, employed by the Borrower for
                      project management, oversight, and technical support and contracted workers - consultants providing technical
                      advisory services. Subprojects may face OHS risks such as civil works hazards, exposure to dangerous substances,
                      traffic safety, labor influx, GBV/SEA/SH, and forced or child labor. Brazil’s labor legislation ensures fair treatment,


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Bioeconomy And Sustainable Regional Development Project (P510383)



                      equity of opportunities, freedom of association and protection of the labor force consistent with ESS2. The ESMM will
                      specify labor management measures and sub-loan clauses.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. Different activities under the project such as water and sanitation systems, and irrigation
                      systems can lead to pollution risks arising from the generation of hazardous waste, reduction of water and soil
                      quality, air emissions from combustion sources (machines and backup power generators); noise and fugitive dust
                      emissions; environmental contamination risks from the use and storage of fuels and lubricants for the construction
                      machines and power generators, among others. Use of pesticides could also be a risk linked to CSA and bioeconomy
                      activities. The ESMM will seek to standardize the borrower’s approach on pollution prevention and management, and
                      resource efficiency measures, including IPM/IVM requirements, where applicable. GHG emissions are likely to be
                      minor, emanating from small-scale sources, and are not likely to be significant, avoiding the need for detailed
                      estimations.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      The subprojects can potentially have adverse impacts from construction-related hazards, i.e., excavation, heavy
                      machinery use, exposure to noise, dust, and vibration; increased traffic and accident risk; temporarily induced labor
                      influx, and the retainment of workers to safeguard their personnel and property. Activities may involve the use,
                      storage, and transport of hazardous materials, i.e., fuels, lubricants, and chemicals for water treatment or agricultural
                      processes. Irrigation project could potentially rely on the operation of existing dams. If necessary, the ESS4 Annex A




Public Disclosure
                      requirements will be followed together with the country’s robust legislation on dam safety. MIDR and all FIs involved
                      can achieve outcomes materially consistent with the ESS 4 by following the BESF and applying FIs procedures. An
                      ESMM will be developed to adequately manage risks to and ensure harmonization of procedures among the different
                      FIs involved.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      As subprojects to be financed will only be selected during Project implementation, this standard is considered
                      relevant on a precautionary basis. Most subprojects will likely be financed by the private sector, which under Brazilian
                      law cannot acquire land by expropriation. Land will instead be bought through voluntary market transactions,
                      ensuring sellers are fully informed and free to refuse. As a general rule, no Public Fund that will be blended with
                      Project resources for credit lines cannot be used for land acquisition. Nevertheless, supporting increased access to
                      finance for WWS private operators and the irrigation sector may require land acquisition for water treatment plants,
                      pumping stations, pipelines, and irrigation canals. So, eligibility criteria and requirements for compliance with ESS 5
                      will be detailed in the ESMM, ESCP. Subprojects that require the acquisition of land that results in displacement
                      (physical or economic) will not be eligible.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      Bioeconomy and CSA can potentially result in diffuse impacts to biodiversity and habitat loss from land conversion to
                      farming production. Likewise, construction works for sanitation/irrigation systems may potentially result in forest
                      clearing, habitat fragmentation for the water piping and construction sites. Sustainable forest concessions may lead


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Bioeconomy And Sustainable Regional Development Project (P510383)



                      to habitat disruption and increase vulnerability to forest fires, particularly with inadequate planning and no use of
                      proper certification. As interventions are not yet identified, an ESMM will be developed to assess the E&S
                      impacts/risks of the intended pipeline, and define proper procedures and criteria to assess, avoid, mitigate, or
                      compensate for the loss of habitats or impacts to the biodiversity that they support, including requirements for
                      managing living natural resources consistent with ESS6. To limit the risk of the project and avoid discrepancies
                      between the BESF-ESS6, specific conditions will be included in the Exclusion List.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                              Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is relevant. The project activities may support subprojects located within the buffer zones of demarcated or
                      under demarcation indigenous lands or may benefit indigenous peoples (exclusively or predominantly). During
                      preparation, the team will assess whether the Borrower and FIs requirements for projects affecting indigenous
                      peoples (positively or negatively) are materially consistent with the objectives of ESS7, including provisions to assess
                      the applicability of FPIC, when relevant. If any gap is identified additional measures will be proposed for the ESMM,
                      including eligibility requirements for subprojects (including in the Exclusion List projects that may have significant
                      adverse impacts or do not adequately benefit indigenous peoples), risk management measures (including links to risk
                      to their use of natural resources or cultural heritage), and GM channels be accessible and culturally appropriate.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      Although the subprojects are not yet known, ESS8 is considered relevant because subprojects may be supported if




Public Disclosure
                      they are a) located within or near legally protected areas, or recognized as cultural heritage, or legally defined buffer
                      zones, b) involve works that imply excavations, demolitions, earthmoving or other alterations to the physical
                      environment; or c) commercial use of cultural heritage. The E&S Risk Management Procedures Manual to be
                      prepared for the Project will include requirements to ensure the achievement of results materially consistent with the
                      objectives of ESS 8 (and ESS7 when in areas with indigenous peoples).

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                 Relevant

                      Sub loans will be granted to sub-borrowers, including private-sector actors, cooperatives, and local entrepreneurs,
                      through PPDBs that have been previously evaluated by the task team and meet the key requirements of ESS 9,
                      namely: A Social, Environmental and Climate Responsibility Policy endorsed by senior management; • Clearly defined
                      procedures for identifying, assessing, managing, monitoring and reviewing E&S risks and impacts; • An E&S risk
                      categorization system considering the nature and magnitude of E&S risks, contextual factors and type of financing; •
                      Organizational structure with clearly identified roles and responsibilities for E&S risk management; • Labor
                      management procedures; and • External communication and grievance mechanisms. To ensure harmonization and
                      standardization of the procedures to be used by the different Banks for this project, considering the different levels of
                      maturity of the ESMSs, an E&S Management Manual will be prepared by the borrower.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          No


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Bioeconomy And Sustainable Regional Development Project (P510383)



                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                      No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                               TBD
                       The Brazilian legal and institutional framework ruling environmental licensing processes and the E&S and climate
                       responsibilities of FIs is comprehensive, robust, and well-enforced. It clearly requires consideration of E&S and climate
                       risks and impacts in the assessment of financing requests (CMN Resolution 4,943/2021). The ESMSs of the currently
                       selected PPDBs are mostly aligned with the key elements as established in the ESS9. During project preparation the
                       Bank will further assess their applicability to the current scope of the project and analyze the project management
                       arrangements, and systematics to E&S monitoring and reporting to determine whether the use of Borrower
                       Framework (in part or in a whole) enables the project to achieve objectives materially consistent with the ESSs.
                       Subsequently and as deemed as appropriate by the Bank, additional E&S requirements may be proposed to bridge
                       potential gaps and enhance the whole E&S risk management procedures of the borrower (MIDR).


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                    No
                       Not applicable.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or



Public Disclosure
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The following actions are planned during Project Preparation:

                     1)      In-depth assessment of Constitutional Funds E&S procedures managed by SUDAM, SUDENE, SUDECO, as a
                     baseline to review the ESMS for second-tier lending.
                     2)      Preparation of E&S screening / eligibility criteria (exclusion list) that define E&S risks and impact of a substantial
                     nature and scope, and E&S high risks activities and impacts that may be included in a list of restricted activities.

                     Actions to be completed prior to Appraisal:

                     1)      Exclusion List to screen out high-risk subprojects.
                     2)      List of activities/sectors to be financed.
                     3)      Draft E&S Management Manual, including the project-level E&S risks and impacts and mitigation measures (to
                     be disclosed prior to Appraisal).
                     4)      Draft SEP.
                     5)      Draft ESCP.

                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):

                     1)      The roadmap for MIDR to implement the E&S Management Manual. This instrument (final version) will be
                     ready for implementation ninety (90) days after Effectiveness date and will be a disbursement condition.


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                          Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Bioeconomy And Sustainable Regional Development Project (P510383)



                     2)      Develop a plan for capacity building and training for MIDR, SUDAM, SUDENE, SUDECO and PPDBs, including
                     milestones for the ESMSs enhancement requirements.
                     3)      Monitoring of PPDBs' ESMS performance.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Marie Caroline Paviot                   Title:       Senior Agriculture Economist

                      Email:                  mpaviot@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Werner L. Kornexl                       Job Title:   Senior Natural Resources
                                                                                                   Management Specialist

                      Email:                  wkornexl@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Juliana Menezes Garrido                 Job Title:   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                   Specialist

                      Email:                  jgarrido@worldbank.org



Public Disclosure    IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                    Marie Caroline Paviot, Werner L. Kornexl, Juliana Menezes Garrido

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:           Guilherme Todt Cardoso De Faro

                     ADM Social Specialist:                  Juliana Medeiros Paiva




                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                  Page 9 of 9
