Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (P510120)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 07/15/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05068




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Aug 09, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (P510120)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510120                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)     Ruzizi 3                    2026

                     Operation Name            Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Eastern and Southern      Burundi, Congo, Democratic Republic    EASTERN AND                 Energy & Extractives
                     Africa                    of, Rwanda                             SOUTHERN AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance,      Ruzizi 3 Energy Limited                19-Sep-2025                 04-Dec-2025
                     Ministry of Finance
                     and Economic
                     Planning, Ministry of
                     Finance



Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     14-Jun-2022               925,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective is to increase the supply of clean hydropower electricity to Burundi, Democratic
                     Republic of Congo, and Rwanda by leveraging private capital.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Plant Project (Ruzizi 3 HPP or Project), which will have an installed generation
                     capacity of 206 MW, is located in Central Africa along the Ruzizi River which forms a natural border between Rwanda,
                     Burundi and Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), flowing southwards from Lake Kivu into Lake Tanganyika. Ruzizi III will
                     be located downstream of the existing Ruzizi I (29.2MW) and Ruzizi II (43.8 MW) HPPs, commissioned respectively in

                    Aug 09, 2025                                                                                                  Page 2 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (P510120)



                     1958 and 1989. Ruzizi I HPP is located 3 km downstream of the outlet of Lake Kivu and controls the discharge from Lake
                     Kivu. A fourth hydropower scheme, Ruzizi IV, is also planned in the future. The Ruzizi 3 HPP is configured to include the
                     construction of a dam (51 meters high), a 3.8 km long headrace tunnel, a power station (206 MW installed capacity with
                     an expected annual production of 1,140 GWh) and a 7 km long double circuit 220 kV transmission line to a substation at
                     Kamanyola which is adjacent to the common border between the three countries. It includes a compact reservoir
                     (approx. 46 hectares of inundated surface area) to provide regulation capacity and support the daily peak demand of
                     the three countries. The scope of the Project also includes the following ancillary infrastructure: (i) permanent roads
                     and access roads (9.6 km in DRC and 19.5 km in Rwanda), (ii) quarries and Borrow pit sites, and (iii) Spoil Disposal Areas.
                     The project will include four components funded by various sources, including the CSs, concessional and non-
                     concessional lenders, and the private sponsors: (i) Component 1: Hydropower Facility; (ii) Component 2: Substation and
                     transmission lines; (iii) Component 3: Local area development; and (iv) Component 4: Project management and
                     technical assistance. The IDA financing, credits and grants totaling US$260 million, will be provided either jointly or in
                     parallel with the other lenders . Component 1: Hydropower Facility. This component aims at developing the hydropower
                     facility as an Independent Power Producer (IPP). It includes the Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC)
                     contract for the 206 MW hydropower facility, with an estimated cost of US$538 million. It also includes the associated
                     project development, construction supervision, insurance, contingencies and project financing costs. The single turnkey
                     EPC contract will cover the following items: (i) the access roads to the hydropower facility; (ii) the 51 meter high
                     embankment dam, the river diversion works, the spillway, the bottom outlet, the eco-flow bypass and associated mini-
                     hydro unit; (iii) the power intake, the 3,800 meter long concrete-lined headrace tunnel, the surge shaft, the 360 meter
                     long steel-lined tunnel and penstock; (iv) the surface powerhouse with three turbine-generator units; (v) the switchyard,
                     the 30 kV site distribution lines and the 7.1 km long 220 kV transmission line to the Kamanyola substation (in DRC); and




Public Disclosure
                     (vi) the employer’s camp. Key resilience measures will ensure that the infrastructure is better equipped to withstand the
                     challenges posed by climate change. The team is also exploring support from PPIAF and GIF to pilot the toolkit for
                     resilient PPPs in hydropower projects, which would be highly beneficial to adopt innovative and best practices to
                     include resilience measures as part of the EPC contract. The power generated by the facility will be sold equally (one
                     third each) to the electricity utility companies of the three countries, REGIDESO in Burundi, SNEL in DRC and EUCL in
                     Rwanda, together referred as the Offtakers, under Power Purchase Agreements signed in 2019. Component 2:
                     Substation and Transmission Lines. This component, considered as associated facilities to component 1, will also benefit
                     from support to pilot the climate resilience toolkit. It includes the construction of the Kamanyola 220 kV substation with
                     a dispatch and cascade coordination center , as well as the three 220 kV transmission lines to evacuate electricity from
                     the hydropower facility to the three countries, departing from the Kamanyola substation, along the following routes: (i)
                     Burundi (Kamanyola-Bujumbura, approximately 77 km) ; (ii) the eastern provinces of DRC, which are currently isolated
                     from the country’s national grid (Kamanyola-Buhandahanda, approximately 68 km) ; and (iii) Rwanda (Kamanyola-
                     Karongi, approximately 93 km) . The climate-resilient transmission lines (reinforced poles and cables against floods and
                     heatwaves, durable material used for transformers) are designed to withstand floods and heatwaves, using durable
                     materials for transformers, and will help create a regional grid backbone for future power trade. Component 3: Local
                     Area Development Program. This component will fund a local area development program (LADP) in each country,
                     forming part of risk mitigation through community-focused activities. The LADP area includes the Groupement of
                     Kashenyi and Karhongo in Walungu territory in DRC; Nzahaha and Bugarama sectors of Rusizi District in Western
                     Province in Rwanda; and communes of Rugombo and Buganda in Cibitoke Province in Burundi, totaling around 385,115
                     people across 704 km²; about 547 average people per km2 (Burundi - 367/km2, DRC - 753/km2 and Rwanda - 874/km2).
                     The LADPs were created with community input and feature investments in socio-economic infrastructures, livelihoods
                     support, strengthening of existing Technical and Vocational Education and Trainings (TVETs), and tailored support to


                    Aug 09, 2025                                                                                                     Page 3 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (P510120)



                     credit and saving groups. A validation process will prioritize investments based on community needs and in coordination
                     with local authorities. Aimed at improving services and livelihoods for vulnerable groups, women, and youth, the
                     program also seeks to enhance local administrative capacities. This approach promotes sustainable social benefits and
                     adheres to the Bank's environmental and social framework (ESF) by mitigating adverse impacts and compensating for
                     loss of physical assets and livelihood opportunities, connected to the routing of transmission lines and other project-
                     connected infrastructure. Component 4: Project Support. This component will support project management, technical
                     assistance, and capacity building for the CSs, public utility companies, and EGL. It includes advisory and analytical work
                     to strengthen institutional, legal, and regulatory frameworks, and facilitate electricity trade and dispatch between public
                     utilities. Associated Facilities that will help dispatching the electricity produced by Ruzizi 3 include: • Kamanyola 220 kV
                     Substation is situated in DRC and developed by EGL with financial support from KfW. A Feasibility Study, ESIA and RAP
                     were prepared in 2014. These studies will be updated by appraisal to reflect recent developments in the Ruzizi III
                     Project and align with the World Bank’s Environemental and Social Standards. • Kamanyola-Buhandahada 220 kV
                     Transmission Line. It’s situated in DRC and is being developed by EGL with financial support from the KfW. Pre-
                     Feasibility studies for the 68.5 km line have been completed. However, the studies will need to be updated by appraisal
                     to take into account changes made to the Ruzizi-III HPP, and align with the World Bank’s Environemental and Social
                     Standards. • Kamanyola - Bujumbura 220 kV Transmission Line is developed in Burundi by REGIDESO with financial
                     support from AfDB and KfW. Burundi line is already under construction and completion of works is expected in 2023. •
                     Kamanyola – Karongi 220 kV TL is developed by Rwanda Energy Group (REG) with financial support from the EIB.
                     Feasibility studies are underway and ESIA is due by appraisal. • Kamanyola - Kibuye 220 kV TL is developed by Rwanda
                     Energy Group (REG) with financial support from the EIB. A pre-feasibility study and ESIA were prepared in 2014.
                     However, the feasibility study and ESIA will be updated by appraisal and a RAP prepared. The Project will be an




Public Disclosure
                     important part of the power system in the three Contracting States (CS). It will offer significant benefits to the region to
                     which it will provide clean power potentially generating significant revenues and boosting development and stability.
                     Aside from fulfilling energy needs, the Project will enable the displacement of more expensive thermal generation in the
                     region and support the absorption of variable renewable energy sources (such as solar). The Project could thus become
                     a catalyzer for a green energy transition in the sub-region. The CS/EGL will : (i) handle operation and maintenance of
                     REL’s Corporate Social Responsibility investments (electrification of villages; support to the development of fish farming
                     and fisheries activities in the future reservoir; support to the development of sustainable water supply systems in the
                     villages; support to roads improvement; flour mills and small processing installation in the villages; support to improve
                     schools -construction of new rooms and provision of schooling equipment and access to electricity; support to health
                     centers, by provision of medicines and medical equipment); (ii) manage the Ruzizi III Bridge over the Ruzizi river; (iii)
                     create and operate the regional dispatching center; (iv) monitor E&S Conditions in the Environmental Permit; (v) ensure
                     cascade management and watershed and transboundary coordination/dialogue; (vi) implement eventual security
                     management plans, and (vii) implement technical assistance activities. These activities are non-private sector related
                     activities and will follow the ESF Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs). Activities to be implemented by Ruzizi III
                     Energy Limited (REL) include construction, operation and maintenance of the hydropower plant; construction and
                     maintenance of access roads (~20km); construction and operation of 220 kV Switchyard; construction and operation of
                     7.2km 220kV T-line from the switchyard to the Kamanyola substation; construction and operation of permanent
                     Operators’ Camps; exploitation and rehabilitation of quarries, borrow areas and river diversion. The RAP will be
                     implemented by REL. REL will directly employ 25 people with priority to the citizens of the CSs for capacity building
                     purposes. Permanent access roads will be included in the main EPC contract where REL is the employer. REL will be
                     responsible for the maintenance during the operation phase. The bridge over the Ruzizi River will be an operating
                     border crossing point. It will be rebuilt under EPC contract, but it will be managed by the immigration authorities of


                    Aug 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (P510120)



                     both countries. CSs/EGL/REGIDESO/Rwanda Energy Group (REG) will develop, finance, construct, own, ensure, operate
                     and maintain the above listed Transmission Lines-TL. Lenders’ E&S standards requirements (WBG’s PS and ESSs) will be
                     applied as they are the most stringent and national standards will be complemented as needed so that all facilities will
                     meet WBG’s PS and ESSs.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (Ruzizi 3 HPP) is a regional initiative located along the Ruzizi River, which
                     forms a natural border between Rwanda, Burundi, and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The project is situated
                     in a rural setting and involves significant environmental and social considerations due to its location in a high-
                     biodiversity area within the Albertine Rift Montane Forests ecoregion. The project area has been heavily modified,
                     resulting in lower species richness, but it still supports sensitive biodiversity, including migratory fish species and
                     terrestrial habitats. The project impacts various communities across Rwanda and DRC, affecting sectors and
                     groupements with a significantly large population as described earlier. . It involves Associated Facilities such as
                     transmission lines (T/Ls) and switchyards, which cross predominantly agricultural land. The presence of Indigenous
                     Peoples (IPs) and other minorities, such as the Historically Marginalized Communities in Rwanda and the Batwa ethnic
                     group in DRC, is significant, with anthropological studies confirming the applicability of indigenous peoples' safeguards.
                     The project area is prone to landslides, contributing to sediment load in the river. The terrestrial habitat in the Project
                     area mainly consists of modified habitats like cultivated land and tree plantations. Climate change poses additional risks,
                     with projections of increased temperatures and flooding events that could impact hydropower performance. Social risks
                     involve land use changes, affecting agriculture and grazing practices, and the displacement of communities. Other



Public Disclosure
                     vulnerable populations include households headed by the elderly, disabled, women, and those without land ownership.
                     Gender dynamics are patriarchal, with issues like gender-based violence prevalent. The project's will provide reliable
                     and clean electricity, stimulate economic activities, create jobs, and improve living standards.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Ruzizi 3 HPP involves a public-private partnership with Ruzizi 3 Energy Limited (REL) as the special purpose vehicle
                     company. REL is responsible for implementing the Private sector Component 1 (hydropower facility). For this
                     component, the project will apply O.P. 4.03, obligating REL as a Private Sector Entity to comply with the
                     IFC/MIGA/WBPerformance Standards (PS) and the applicable WBG Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines.
                     Obligations of the three Contracting States (CS) will apply the WB Environmental and Social Framework (ESF)
                     requirements. Activities that apply the ESF include Component 2 (Kamanyola substation, T/Ls), Component 3 (Local Area
                     Development Plan) and Component 4 (Technical Assistance). Each CS will establish a Project Implementation Unit (PIU).
                     There will be regular discussions to assess and ensure that the PIU and related implementing bodies have the capacity
                     to manage the project risks in accordance with the applicable policy framework. The project will also include capacity
                     strengthening measures as needed for the E&S technical staff such as trainings, POE support, etc.. EGL will act as the
                     central communication link with REL and will establish its own PIU with engineering skills. REL will hire an EPC contractor
                     to build the HPP, who will finalize the engineering design and develop the Environmental and Social Management Plans
                     (ESMP) for the construction phase of the project. REL and the EPC contractor will establish and maintain an
                     Environmental, Social, and Health and Safety Management Systems (ESMS) and recruit experienced specialists.
                     Coordination mechanisms will be established with upstream Ruzizi 1 and 2 HPPs. An Independent Engineer will handle
                     commissioning certifications and assessments, while a Lender Technical Advisor will monitor construction progress. A


                    Aug 09, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (P510120)



                     Dam Safety panel will ensure safety plans are prepared, and an independent E&S Panel of Experts will review the
                     design, ESIA and mitigation measures.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                  High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                           High
                     The environmental risk rating under OP 4.03 World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities is
                     classified as Category A for Component 1 (C1) and therefore the overall environmental risk of the Project is High.
                     Activities under the ESF for non-Private Sector Activities under Components 2, 3 and 4 (C2, C3 and C4), including the
                     associated substation, transmission lines (T/Ls) and Local Area Development Plan (LADP are considered Substantial
                     for environmental risk. The complex structure of the project compounded by the involvement of various stakeholders
                     with differing incentives and experience levels increasesimplementation and monitoring risks. The magnitude and
                     scale of the planned physical works , including the construction of a 51-meter-high rockfill embankment dam, access
                     roads and workers' accommodation, among other infrastructurewill significantly and permanently alter the
                     landscape, inundate agricultural land, and impact local ecosystems. The construction and operation of the HPP,
                     Associated Facilities (AF), and LADP pose significant environmental risks and impacts, including blasting, erosion and
                     landslide risks, dam safety issues, degradation and loss of aquatic and terrestrial habitat, alteration of river flows,
                     increased pollution, hazardous waste generation, community health and safety risks such as traffic safety, and
                     occupational health and safety. Significant direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts are expected, particularly



Public Disclosure
                     concerning erosion, sedimentation, aquatic species, hydrology, and floods. The EPC Contractor, responsible for
                     developing detailed E&S management plans and selecting quarries, has not been retained, posing operational risks.
                     The limited capacity of national and provincial authorities to supervise mitigation measures raises the need for
                     effective oversight. Ongoing volatility and security risks in eastern DRC exacerbate project risks.
                                                                                                                                             High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating under OP 4.03 World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities is classified as
                     category A and High under the ESF for non-Private Sector Activities. As a greenfield development, it poses significant
                     social challenges, such as (i) involuntary resettlement, including physical and economic displacement, associated with
                     the expected land acquisition (226 hectares), affecting 2,387 project-affected households (PAHs), and including
                     impacts on crops or informal vendors; (ii) labor risks related to poor working conditions, with concerns about
                     potentially inadequate management of labor camps leading to workers’ exploitation and Occupational Health and
                     Safety (OHS) risks, and also risk of increased child labor among the suppliers of construction materials and service
                     providers; (iii) high levels of labor influx, due to the scope of the planned civil works, straining local resources and
                     services; (iv) community health and safety risks include increased traffic accidents, exposure to natural hazards,
                     communicable diseases, and sexually transmitted infections (STIs), along with presence of construction workers and
                     security services, which may lead to increased level of sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) and sexual harassment
                     (SH), including increased sex work; (v) potential intensification of tensions and social conflicts, including due to
                     increased pressure on land use and availability, pressure on health facilities, and local inflation, along with the risk of
                     potential exclusion of vulnerable groups and elite capture of project benefits; and (vi) cultural heritage impacts on




                    Aug 09, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (P510120)



                     sites like modern era churches, religious sites, and graves. The high-risk rating is also informed by a challenging
                     project context, including the volatile security situation in eastern DRC, where armed groups are currently active.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      A draft Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for C1 has been prepared by REL to meet PSs and
                      reviewed by the Bank (HPP ESIA). It identifies risks such as road safety, OHS, child labor, air quality changes, noise,
                      water contamination, and impacts on river flow and biodiversity. The HPP ESIA includes a Cumulative Impact
                      Assessment, addressing impacts from Ruzizi 1 and 2, irrigation, and climate change. E&S management plans (ESMPs)
                      are proposed in the ESIA (air quality, water management, environmental flow, etc.), with responsibilities delegated to
                      the EPC Contractor. A final HPP ESIA will be disclosed by Appraisal. REL and EPC contractor will develop ESMSs for
                      Construction and Operation of the HPP. ESIAs for quarries will be developed by EPC contractor during Project
                      implementation when the sites are identified . Existing ESIAs for the T/Ls will be updated by non-WB concessional
                      lenders to meet ESF requirements for each CS.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      Private sector-led activities (C1) require stakeholder engagement under PS1, with a Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Public Disclosure
                      (SEP) prepared as part of the HPP ESIA . Consultations were held in DRC and Rwanda, focusing on community
                      concerns, including women's security and GBV issues. Identified stakeholders include supranational organizations,
                      central administrations, devolved administrations, communities, CSOs, and donors. A draft SEP is being updated to
                      WB standards and will be disclosed before appraisal. It will includeconsultations with communities and other
                      stakeholders. Non-private sector activities include construction of infrastructure like roads, water supply, health,
                      education, and flour mills (C3), as well as regional dispatching center operations and Kamanyola sub-station
                      construction (C2). The CSs will engage stakeholders around WB-supported activities, and will be reflected in the SEP,
                      consistent with ESS 10. The Client will ensure that a grievance mechanism (GM) is established.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      Private sector-led activities (C1) will apply PS2. For the HPP, 1,000+ workers will be needed during construction,
                      primarily at the dam site, with only 50 workers needed during operation. During construction, the EPC contractor will
                      set up a temporary accommodation camp for workers, designed according to international standards, and dismantled
                      post-construction. REL will separately build its own workers accommodation. OHS risks during construction include
                      noise, dust, vibrations, fire, and explosion hazards, with mitigation plans incorporated as part of the ESMP and
                      implemented through the respective ESMSs. Labor influx is anticipated, with efforts to recruit locally and manage
                      social impacts. CSs/EGL has a draft Labor Management Procedures (LMP) consistent with ESS2 requirements related
                      to labor and working conditions for Non-private sector activities (C2, C3 and C4).The LMP will be updated and
                      disclosed prior to project effectiveness.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant


                    Aug 09, 2025                                                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (P510120)



                      PS3 is relevant for Private-sector led activities (C1). The HPP ESIA identifies risks related to pollution from
                      construction, noise and vibrations, GHG emissions, and climate change impacts such as altered precipitation and
                      streamflow. Construction waste is challenging, with hazardous waste posing major risks due to limited disposal
                      facilities. Soil and water pollution risks stem from construction activities and accidental spills. Water use and
                      wastewater treatment plans are to be defined. Noise from generators is significant. Cumulative impacts on the Ruzizi
                      watershed include effects on hydrology, sediment loads, and fish populations. Mitigation measures and plans are
                      described in the HPP ESIA. Non-private sector activities (C2, C3 and C4) will apply ESS3. Mitigation measures
                      contained in the ESIAs for the T/Ls will be enhanced to comply with ESS3. LADP investments will have different risks
                      and impacts according to subproject scale, which is not yet defined at Concept.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      Private sector-led activities (C1) are subject to PS4 . Key risks include the alteration of ecosystem services (e.g. crop
                      cultivation, livestock farming, and fishing), water quality alterations, traffic safety risks, community exposure to
                      diseases and nuisances, and SEA/SH risks. An independent Panel of Experts will review and advise on dam safety
                      measures, with ToR already approved by the WB. REL has prepared the outline of the following Dam Safety Plans: (i)
                      Construction supervision and quality assurance plan (CSQAP); (ii) instrumentation plan (IP); (iii) operation and
                      maintenance plan (O&MP); and (iv) an emergency preparedness plan (EPP). These documents will be completed by
                      Appraisal. REL has developed a Security Risk Assessment and Management Plan for the HPP, emphasizing adherence
                      to human rights principles. Non-private sector activities (C2, C3 and C4) will apply ESS4. LADP investments will have
                      different risks and impacts according to subproject scale.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      Private sector-led activities (C1) are subject to PS5, focusing on land acquisition impacts mainly affecting crop-farming
                      communities. Fishing is present but not a major livelihood. The project requires 226 hectares, impacting agricultural
                      land and households in Rwanda and DRC, with no land acquisition in Burundi. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), to
                      be disclosed by REL as part of the HPP ESIA, will manage impacts through a census, property identification, and asset
                      valuation. The RAP identifies 7 physically displaced households in Rwanda and 50 in DRC, with 841 and 1,546
                      households economically affected, respectively. Vulnerable groups include landless, women-, elder-, disabled-
                      headed, and marginalized households. Non-private sector activities (C2, C3, C4) will apply ESS5. A draft RAP with an
                      RPF is being updated to align with the WB RAP template, ESS5, and national laws. For private sector involvement, PS5
                      measures will be added to the RAP template before the start of activities.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      Private sector-led activities (C1) are subject to PS6. The HPP footprint is located outside any natural protected areas
                      (NPA). River flow at the site is regulated by the upstream Ruzizi 2 HPP in the cascade. The Rusizi River National Park
                      and Ramsar wetland is 88km downstream. Biodiversity risks from dam construction and operation can lead to habitat
                      destruction, dewatering, and increased hunting. The HPP will comply with a minimum ecological water flow as
                      established in the HPP ESIA. Additional assessment is needed to ascertain impacts to endangered fish species
                      identified in tributaries upstream the proposed site. This will inform the critical habitat assessment and any potential
                      updates to the Biodiversity Management Plan (BAP). The EPC contractor shall engage / consult with experts,


                    Aug 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 8 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (P510120)



                      authorities and communities throughout the BAP development. For C2, C3 and C4 activities, updated ESIAs and audits
                      will assess impacts and recommend mitigation measures consistent with the ESF.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                               Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      PS7 and ESS7 are relevant due to the presence of Twa people (Batwa) in project-affected villages (C1–C4). The Batwa
                      in this area do not depend on land for their livelihood and live in mixed settlements, not on traditionally owned land.
                      Therefore, ESS7 conditions do not apply, and FPIC consultation is not mandatory. Social assessments in 2012 and
                      2021 noted their presence but did not classify them as Project Affected Persons (PAPs). However, a 2022 survey
                      identified about 20 Batwa families in Rwanda and 60 in DRC, confirming that some Batwa households do qualify as
                      PAPs. At least 11 households are affected by land acquisition. The RAP will include a section on the livelihood impacts
                      for the affected Batwa, treating them as vulnerable households. By Appraisal, REL will prepare a broader community
                      development plan for all beneficiaries, including information on the affected Batwa.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      Private sector-led activities (C1) are subject to PS8, addressing cultural heritage impacts such as earthworks affecting
                      seven private graves and one church, with compensation or relocation covered in the RAP (ESS5). Access to prayer
                      sites will be maintained unless health and safety concerns arise. A Cultural Heritage Management Plan and Chance
                      Finds Procedure (CFP) will be implemented. The Ruzizi River’s visual impact is considered non-significant. Natural
                      features with cultural value, like sacred groves, will also be considered. Non-private sector activities follow ESS8, with




Public Disclosure
                      updated ESIAs and audits assessing associated facility impacts and recommending mitigation. LADP subprojects may
                      affect cemeteries and sacred sites, requiring a CFP for any artifacts found during construction.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           In Part
                       The Project proposes the partial use of Borrower Framework following environmental permitting processes for each
                       of the three CSs and meet WB E&S requirements at the same time.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                  No




                    Aug 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 9 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (P510120)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The following E&S risk management instruments are expected to be disclosed by Appraisal:

                     - Finalized HPP ESIA (REL)
                     -
                     - Updated Code of Conduct (REL)
                     - Updated RAP (for C1) (REL)
                      -- Draft dam safety plans: A plan for construction supervision and quality assurance (CSQAP), an instrumentation plan
                     (IP), An operation and maintenance plan (O&MP), and An emergency preparedness plan (EPP) (REL)
                     - SEA/SH Action Plan (REL)
                     - Existing ESIAs for transmission lines CSs/EGL
                     -B
                     -Updated Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). (REL)
                     -Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) for Non-Private Sector Activities (C2, C3 and C4). CSs/EGL
                     -Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP) for Private Sector Activities (HPP C1). (REL)

                     The following is expected during project implementation, in accordance with the timeframe defined in the ESCP and
                     ESAP:
                     - Implement a Worker’s GM. (REL)



Public Disclosure
                     - Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) (REL)
                     - Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (REL)
                     - RAP for C2, C3, C4) - prior to commencement of activities. (REL)
                     - LMP (REL) - by effectiveness
                     - Broad community development plan - prior to commencement of activities. (REL)


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Thierno Bah                            Title:         Senior Energy Specialist

                      Email:                  tbah@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Mitsunori Motohashi                    Job Title:     Lead Energy Specialist

                      Email:                  mmotohashi@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Laurencia Karimi Njagi                 Job Title:     Senior Energy Specialist

                      Email:                  lnjagi@worldbank.org



                    Aug 09, 2025                                                                                                  Page 10 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project (P510120)




                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                      Thierno Bah, Mitsunori Motohashi, Laurencia Karimi Njagi

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:             Patrick Wieland Fernandini

                     ADM Social Specialist:                    Boyenge Isasi Dieng




Public Disclosure




                    Aug 09, 2025                                                                                          Page 11 of 11
