Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                     Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                                                        For
                                The IPF Component of Ethiopia: Second Community
                               Action for Landscape Management Program for Results
                                                     (P510697)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                          February 16,2026
                                                                    ADDIS ABABA, ETHIOPIA



                                                                                         1


                                                                                       Official Use Only
Table of Contents
Acronyms ...................................................................................................................................................... 3
   1.       Introduction/Program Description of CALM II ................................................................................. 4
   1.1.         Program Development Objectives and Key Results .................................................................... 4
2. Objective/Description of SEP .................................................................................................................... 7
3. Stakeholder identification and analysis .................................................................................................... 8
   3.1 Methodology ....................................................................................................................................... 8
   3.2. Affected parties and other interested parties ................................................................................... 9
   3.3. Disadvantaged/vulnerable groups ..................................................................................................... 9
4. Stakeholder Engagement Program ......................................................................................................... 10
   4.1. Summary of stakeholder engagement done during Program preparation ..................................... 10
   4.2. Summary of stakeholder needs and methods, tools, and techniques for stakeholder engagement
    ................................................................................................................................................................ 11
   4.3. Stakeholder engagement plan ......................................................................................................... 12
        Table 1. Summary of the stakeholder engagement Plan ................................................................... 12
5. Resources and Responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement activities ......................... 15
   5.1. Resources ......................................................................................................................................... 15
   5.2. Management functions and responsibilities .................................................................................... 16
        5.2.1. The National /Federal Level ..................................................................................................... 16
        5.2.3. Woreda levels ........................................................................................................................... 18
        5.2.4. Kebele Level ............................................................................................................................. 18
6. Grievance Redress Mechanism ............................................................................................................... 20
   6.1. Description of GM ............................................................................................................................ 20
7. Monitoring .............................................................................................................................................. 23
   7.1. Summary of how SEP implementation will be monitored and reported......................................... 23
   7.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups ............................................................................................. 24




                                                                                                                                                                    2


                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Acronyms
ATVET      Agricultural Technical and Vocational Education Training College
CALM       Climate Action through Landscape Management
CBPWDG     Community Based Participatory Watershed Development Guideline
DA         Development Agent
EIA        Environmental Impact Assessment
EIO        Ethiopian Institution of Ombudsman
EPA        Environmental Protection Authority
ESCP       Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF        Environmental and Social Framework
ESIA       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMF       Environmental and Social Management Framework
E-S        Environmental and Social
FGD        Focus Group Discussions
GBV        Gender Based Violence
GRC        Grievance Redress Committee
GRM        Grievance Redress Mechanism
KDCs        Kebele Development Committees)
KLAC       Kebele Land Administration Committee
LMP        Labor Management Procedure
MOA        Ministry of Agriculture
NGOs       Non-Governmental Organization
OHS        Occupational health and safety
OIP        Other interested parties
PAPs       Project Affected Parties
PCU        Program Coordination Unit
SEA        Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
SEP        Stakeholder Engagement Plan
WB         World Bank
WBoANRM    Woreda Birro of Agriculture and Natural Resource Management
WBoLA      Woreda Birro of Land Administration
WSAIE      Women and Social Affair Inclusion Implementation Executive.
WWYCA      Woreda Women, Youth and Children Affairs Office




                                                                                3


                                                                              Official Use Only
1. Introduction/Program Description of CALM 2
1.1.       Program Development Objectives and Key Results
 The proposed Second Community Action for Landscape Management (CALM 2) program’s goals are to
 reverse the process of land degradation in the Ethiopian highlands and strengthen smallholders’ tenure
 security. CALM II builds on the country’s proven track record in addressing land degradation and
 enhancing climate resilience through participatory watershed management and strengthened land
 tenure systems. Tackling land degradation will improve agricultural productivity, create jobs and raise
 rural incomes. Improving tenure security will increase smallholders’ incentives to adopt sustainable land
 management practices, and reduce local conflicts over land rights and access to resources. Combining
 these two approaches increases smallholders’ livelihood security. The Government of Ethiopia (GoE)
 has requested support for the second phase of the Ethiopia Strategic Investment Framework for
 Sustainable Landscape Management (ESIF 2). GoE's Sustainable Land Management Program (SLMP),
 active since 2008, aims to combat land degradation, a major issue costing 2-3 percent of agricultural
 GDP annually. ESIF-2 will support long-term landscape restoration efforts from 2024 to 2038. The
 Program supports priorities in the Global Challenge Program on Forests and the ‘Livable Planet’
 Scorecard, focusing on enhancing resilience, creating more and better jobs, strengthening food security,
 improving land management, and reducing GHG emissions. Building on collaboration with IFC, it
 advances the WBG’s AgriConnect initiative by (i) supporting smallholders’ access to technology and
 infrastructure that will improve productivity and incomes; (ii) supporting government policies that seek
 to attract private investment into agriculture, and (iii) expanding access to finance for, and participation
 in, agri-value chains.

 The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to expand area under sustainable land management
 practices, secure land tenure and increase market linkages in highland areas.Progress toward the
 achievement of the PDO will be measured through the following indicators:

       •   People benefitting from enhanced resilience of terrestrial systems (number)
       •   Landscapes under enhanced conservation and/or sustainable management (hectare)
       •   Program area showing an increase in Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) correcting
           for short-term weather effects (hectare)
       •   Land area with strengthened tenure security, registered in the National Rural Land
           Administration Information System (NRLAIS) (hectare)
       •   New and Better-Paid Jobs (number)
1.2.    Description of the Scope and Thematic Boundaries of the Program
  ESIF-2 provides a strategic framework guiding public, community, and private sector investments in
  scaling up SLsM. It was developed through an analysis of Ethiopia’s current context, policy changes, past
  SLsM achievements, evolving programs, institutional capacity shifts, and global development transitions
  (such as the shift from Millenium Development Goals to Sustainable Development Goals). The proposed
  Program entails support for sustainable landscape management and land administration, as in CALM,
  and expands to other areas of ESIF 2 including participatory forest management, value chain
  development and land certification of communal forests and grazing lands. Support will be provided
  over a five-year period (FY26–FY31), largely aligned with the first phase of ESIF 2. Consistent with CALM,

                                                                                                           4


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
 the Program boundary for CALM 2will include support for NRM extension services at woreda and kebele
 level and will exclude any SLM practice performed as a mass mobilization scheme where evidence of
 voluntary labor participation is unavailable or questionable.
 The proposed Program is built around two areas (RAs):

Results Area 1 - Participatory watershed and forest management: the Program will provide results-based
support to incentivize field-based interventions to scale up participatory watershed and forest
management activities to reduce land degradation and deforestation. The Program will also support (i)
development of capacity at the federal, regional and woreda levels for participatory watershed and forest
management; (ii) SLsM-related research at the federal and regional levels; (iii) strengthening policy,
institutional and regulatory framework for SLsM; (iv) building the SLsM knowledge base; and (v)
management, monitoring and reporting of ESIF 2 interventions for watershed management.
New areas added to the focus of Results Area 1 under the CALM 2 Program are: (i) incorporating
improvement of soil health under sustainable landscape management practices; (ii) including and
managing natural forest areas adjacent to Program watersheds under a Participatory Forest Management
approach which also integrates forest restoration through Afforestation Reforestation, supported directly
by the CIF funds and IDA under the PforR component; (iii) direct support to cooperatives within the
program’s watersheds to participate in existing and emerging agri-value chains; and (iv) promoting
smallholder participation in payments for ecosystem services (PES) and emerging carbon markets,
supported by SCALE and NDF funding.
The IFC will provide direct support for market linkage/advisory services and capacity building for
agribusiness development. The IFC aims to work on 10 agri-value chains through a phased approach over
the program’s life. Once CALM 2 is operational, specific value chains will be identified through a
combination of IFC’s existing clients and other firms through quick assessments undertaken in each
region.
Results Area 2 - Rural land administration: the Program will provide results-based support for improved
rural land tenure security and transferability of rights by incentivizing: (i) preparation of SLLCs and their
issuance for private landholdings; and (ii) installation and operation of the NRLAIS at federal, regional and
woreda levels. The Program will also support (iii) development of capacity at the federal, regional and
woreda levels for rural land administration; (iv) strengthening policy, institutional and regulatory
framework for rural land administration; and (v) management, monitoring and reporting of ESIF
interventions for improved rural land administration system.
New areas added to the focus of Results Area 2 are: (i) issuance of Second Level Land Holding Certificates
(SLLCs) for communal lands including forests or grazing areas; and (ii) connecting land administration
offices and systems to the national digital infrastructure to strengthen and improve land administration
services, including transparent land access and transferability of rights.
Three broad elements of Government of Ethiopia (GoE) expenditures on the Program are excluded from
PfoR support. First, capital expenditures related to irrigation and other capital expenditures are excluded.
Second, activities in predominantly rangeland areas (including the Afar and Somali Regions) will be
excluded because (a) watersheds are less suitable as planning units given the physical and social
characteristics of these rangelands and (b) provisions for issuance of communal pastoral land rights are
at an earlier stage of development. Third, expenditures already financed by World Bank-supported IPF
operations and other development partners (e.g., RLLP, PSNP, LIFT, AGP) are excluded.



                                                                                                           5


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
An IPF component financed by IDA (US$ 8million), SCALE (US$ 6 million) and the Nordic Development
Fund (NDF) (EUR 8.5 m/US$ 9.85 million) will provide cross-cutting support to generate outcomes in
both result areas and the broader government program. It will include targeting themes where
performance improvements were identified during CALM program implementation. The IPF component
will focus on themes that directly map to achieve the DLIs. In addition to recipient-executed activities, the
NDF and SCALE will provide EUR 1.5 million (US$1.75 million) and US$1 million, respectively, in Bank-
executed technical assistance to strengthen the program’s implementation.
The IPF component finances five main activities as described below.
  i.    A1. Support the operational needs of MoA and EFD for CALM 2 implementation, to (i) strengthen
        environmental and social (E&S) risk management (ii) enhance procurement and financial
        management capacity; (iii) improve monitoring, reporting and verification, including using
        advanced remote sensing; and (iv) additional staff to cover forestry, value chain development
        and new areas of the program. Procurement of drones is not permitted.
  ii.   A2. Agribusiness development by linking landowners to agri-businesses and supporting
        payments for ecosystem services. It will include integrated upstream and downstream support
        on agribusiness linkages, value-chain development, and expanded access to finance provided by
        IFC. IFC will play a role in strengthening market access and supply chains development with its
        portfolio and pipeline clients, including early-stage leads that would benefit the watershed users.
        IFC's intervention will emphasize the development and promotion of business models that directly
        involve smallholder farmers and local communities, ensuring their active participation and benefit
        from these initiatives. The IFC and the World Bank teams will collaborate closely to ensure
        effective implementation.
    •   Rollout of IFC Agribusiness Leadership Program (ALP): This proven Program will help agribusiness
        clients (CWUCS, aggregators, and commercial farmers) professionalize operations by building
        supply chains and sustainable enterprises. IFC will customize ALP materials and deliver Training of
        Trainers (ToT) for selected trainers, who will cascade training through government systems. In this
        regard, CALM 2 will deploy the following approaches:
    •   Government-led cascade: Train 30% of verified CWUCS (matured watersheds), reaching 8,000
        cooperative members. Additionally, train staff from financial institutions, private agribusiness,
        business development service providers, and land rental providers, who will in turn train
        individuals involved in SLLC-linked loans and land rental services prior to loan disbursement to
        reduce bankruptcy risk. A specialized firm will be engaged to provide additional ToT, ensure
        quality control, and deliver ongoing coaching and support.
 iii.   A3. Technical assistance for the design and implementation of PES schemes, developing
        partnerships among government agencies, local communities, and private sector actors, and
        supporting the emerging PES programs aligned with Ethiopia’s national PES policy. These actions
        will support mobilization of additional finance, promotion of sustainable land management
        practices, and ensuring the long-term sustainability and scalability of ecosystem service initiatives
        within the CALM program, thus contributing to Ethiopia’s broader climate and development
        objectives.
 iv.    A4. Operationalize pilots to promote voluntary land consolidation in Ethiopia’s highlands to
        demonstrate productivity, environmental, and social gains. These pilots involve baseline surveys,
        voluntary land exchange, and design, testing, and documentation of a computerized platform in
        real-world conditions. Monitoring, evaluation, and learning systems will be established to assess
        and guide the impact of these efforts, utilizing NRLAIS and climate indicators.

                                                                                                           6


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
    v.   A5. Technical assistance and capacity building activities to facilitate access to carbon markets.
     •   Technical assistance to MoA to design and register an emission reduction Program targeting
         non-forest emission categories, including feasibility studies, baseline and benefit-sharing plans,
         digital monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) system design, and capacity building for MRV.
     •   Technical assistance to EFD to support ART116 national program on forests by enhancing the
         forest MRV and safeguards systems, updating baselines, undertaking monitoring and verification
         reports, and supporting the issuance and monetization of ART116 credits through
         communication, marketing and legal support for sales.
     •   Technical assistance to MoPD to operationalize the legal and regulatory framework related to
         carbon credits; capacity building to manage global registries; and provision of IT support for
         managing registries and carbon transactions.
     •   Capacity building technical assistance and livelihood grants through Enhancing Access to
         Benefits while Lowering Emissions (EnABLE) Trust Fund. This includes: (i) provision of inclusive
         alternate livelihoods for women and youth by providing group-based training and targeted
         livelihood grants to strengthen their opportunity to benefit from payment for carbon emission
         reduction while nurturing their skills on nature positive livelihoods interventions; (ii) provision of
         tailored support to enable women and youth to participate and benefit from emission reduction
         activities , (iii) enhancing inclusion of women and youth in CALM 2 benefit sharing plan
         development, and (iv) supporting inclusive community-based performance monitoring system in
         selected woredas and kebeles1. Details of EnABLE financed activities will be outlined in a separate
         Project Operations Manual (POM). Grant disbursement will be described in a Grants Manual.
Safeguards: TA activities under the IPF component exclude protected areas. The pilot on voluntary land
consolidation/land exchange in Ethiopia will be implemented in line with the Agriculture and Rural
Development Policy (Proclamation 1324/20242)
The CALM II is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF). Per
Environmental and Social Standard ESS10 on Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure, the
implementing agencies should provide stakeholders with timely, relevant, understandable, and accessible
information, and consult with them in a culturally appropriate manner, which is free of manipulation,
interference, coercion, discrimination, or intimidation.

2. Objective/Description of SEP
This SEP was prepared for the IPF component activities, and the overall objective of this SEP is to define a
program for stakeholder engagement, including public information disclosure and consultation
throughout the entire program cycle. The SEP outlines the ways in which the Program team will
communicate with stakeholders and includes a mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide
feedback, or make complaints about Program activities or any activities related to the IPF component of
the Program. Besides in addition to the procedure that will be indicated in the voluntary land exchange


1 Given the geographical overlap between CALM 2 and OLFP in Oromia, EnABLE will additionally fund activities benefiting selected

OLFP communities. In these areas, community monitoring will focus on reviewing records and assessing the impact of benefit-
sharing plans and the performance of forest management cooperatives, ensuring that benefits reach vulnerable groups.
2
 Implementation will follow Proclamation 1324/2024 on Rural Land Administration and Use, and the accompanying Land
Consolidation Guidelines.

                                                                                                                              7


                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
guideline/protocol, the SEP will help to provide information to landowners who participated in the
voluntary land exchange through target consultation to achieve consent to participate in the program.
3. Stakeholder identification and analysis
Stakeholders for the CALM II program include government agencies, development partners, Civil Society
groups and leaders, Non-Governmental Organizations, communities-based organization, policies makers,
the media, Local farmers, religious leaders. This Stakeholder Engagement Plan sets out details of the
purpose, timing and methods of stakeholder engagement and strategy for information disclosure. It
incorporates the view of Stakeholders directly and or indirectly affected by the project. Program
stakeholders are defined as individuals, groups, or other entities who: a) are impacted or likely to be
impacted directly or indirectly, positively, or adversely, by the Program (also known as “affected parties”);
and b) may have an interest in the Program (known as “interested parties). They include individuals or
groups whose interests may be affected by the Program and who have the potential to influence the
Program outcomes in any way. Cooperation and negotiation with the stakeholders throughout the
Program development often also requires the identification of people within the groups who act as
legitimate representatives of their respective stakeholder group, i.e. the individuals who have been
entrusted by their fellow group by advocating the groups’ interests in the process of engagement with
the Program. Community representatives may provide helpful insight into the local settings and act as
main conduits for dissemination of the Program-related information and as a primary
communication/liaison link between the Program and targeted communities and their established
networks.

3.1 Methodology
To meet best practice approaches, CALM 2 will apply the following principles for stakeholder engagement:
• Openness and life-cycle approach: Public consultations for the Program(s) will be arranged during the
  whole life cycle, carried out in an open manner, free of external manipulation, interference, coercion,
  or intimidation.
• Informed participation and feedback: Information will be provided to and widely distributed among all
  stakeholders in an appropriate format; opportunities are provided for communicating stakeholder
  feedback, and for analyzing and addressing comments and concerns.
• Inclusiveness and sensitivity: Stakeholder identification is undertaken to support better
  communications and build effective relationships. The participation process for the Programs is
  inclusive. All stakeholders always are encouraged to be involved in the consultation process. Equal
  access to information is provided to all stakeholders. Sensitivity to stakeholders’ needs is the key
  principle underlying the selection of engagement methods. Special attention is given to vulnerable
  groups that may be at risk of being left out of Program benefits, particularly women, the elderly, persons
  with disabilities, displaced persons, and migrant workers and communities, and the cultural sensitivities
  of diverse ethnic groups.
• Flexibility: If social distancing, cultural context (for example, particular gender dynamics), or governance
  factors (for example, high risk of retaliation) inhibits traditional forms of face-to-face engagement, the
  methodology should adapt to other forms of engagement, including various forms of internet- or
  phone-based communication.


                                                                                                            8


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
3.2. Affected parties and other interested parties
Affected parties: Affected parties include local communities, community members, and other parties
that may be subject to direct impacts from the Program. Specifically, the following individuals and groups
fall within this category:

    •   Watershed communities
    •   Land holders
    •   Farmers
    •   Landless youth
    •   Community Development Authority
    •   Beneficiaries of the Program.
    •   Government Staff (Regular and Program staff) at all government structure (Regional, Zone,
        Woreda, and Kebele
    •   Development partners (GIZ, WB, CSOs, World Vision)
    •   Agro-Pastoralists
    •   Communities at large

Other Interested Parties: The projects’ stakeholders also include parties other than the directly affected
communities, called Other Interested Parties – this including individuals/groups/entities that may not
experience direct impacts from the Program but who consider or perceive their interests as being affected
by the Program and/or who could affect the Program and the process of its implementation in some way.
The stakeholders in this category identify for this Program include:
    • The local population who can benefit indirectly from the Program
    • Key social institutions such as village councils, women’s groups
    • Ministry of Finance and other government agencies
    • Local, regional and national level civil societies and NGOs
    • Media and other interest groups including social media activists
    • Research Center, University, ATVET
    • National and International NGOs
    • Politician
    • Bank and MFI
    • Cooperatives
3.3. Disadvantaged/vulnerable groups
Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the Program may be added, further confirmed,
and consulted through dedicated means, as appropriate. Under requirements of ESS7 vulnerable Groups
– persons who may be disproportionately impacted or further disadvantaged by the Program(s) as
compared with any other groups due to their vulnerable status and that may require special engagement
efforts to ensure their equal representation in the consultation and decision-making process associated
with the Program. The stakeholders in this category identify for this Program include:


                                                                                                         9


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
   •   Elderly/ Aged farmers
   •   Orphan
   •   Persons with disabilities and their caregivers
   •   Low-income families/extreme poor and especially female headed households
   •   Landless youth.
   •   Ethnic minority
   •   Women and girls
   •   Chronically illness people
   •   Seasonally migrate people


4. Stakeholder Engagement Program
4.1. Summary of stakeholder engagement done during Program preparation
This Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is designed to establish an effective platform for productive
interaction with the potentially affected parties and others with interest in the implementation outcome
of CALMII. Meaningful stakeholder engagement throughout the Program cycle was feedback to inform
Program design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, clarify Program objectives, scope, and
manage expectations, assess and mitigate Program environmental and social risks, enhance Program
outcomes and benefits, build constituencies and collaboration, disseminate Program information/
materials, address Program grievances. Stakeholder consultations were conducted in MAR/2025 at
federal level and the consultation participant designated from EPA, EIO, WSAIE, MOA and Programs.
Official meetings and informal meetings are used for consultation to find out about the interest of the
stakeholders. In addition, virtual meetings were conducted with stakeholders that they could not attend
because of other missions.
The issues discussed from this experienced meeting revealed that the stakeholders have high interest on
the program and supporting the community. Among the many issues raised by the participant, core
stakeholders’ interest in the program should be outshine with regards to budget, monitoring and
evaluation, community supporting and like.

Key Issues Raised During the Discussion

   •    The extent of stakeholders’ engagement (When and How)
   •    Detailed activities of stakeholders and basic budget estimates.
   •    The coordination among key stakeholders
   •    Sustainability considerations in the program design.
    • Monitoring mechanism of the program
Intensive discussion has been conducted to address the issues raised during the meeting. And the
stakeholders agreed to plan the activities and put in estimated budget. Responsibilities have been
committed by key stakeholders.




                                                                                                     10


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
4.2. Summary of stakeholder needs and methods, tools, and techniques for stakeholder
engagement
Different means of communication to consult with stakeholders considering the characteristics of the
target audience and covering different stakeholder needs as stated below:
    • Structured Agenda: This agenda is prepared based on the Program/ component which is under
        consultation. Using a focused agenda will ensure that key strategic and risk items can be discussed
        with decision-makers and influencers to mitigate risk proactively. This tool will be used with both
        PAPs and OIPs.
    • Focus Group Discussions: The aim of a focus group discussion is to bring together stakeholders
        with the same interests or common characteristics into a meeting to discuss specific topics or
        Program components in a focused manner. For example, focus group methods may be used to
        explore issues that are relevant to specific groups or sub-groups of a community, such as youth,
        the elderly, women, and so on.
    • 3) Community Consultations: These consultations are focused on identifying and discussing
        stakeholder concerns and disclosing Program information to both PAP and to a lesser extent OIP.
        Such consultations should, wherever feasible, make use of local languages and be accessible in
        terms of (location, time, open invitation etc.) to reach a broad range of groups and individuals
        within communities. Besides, participation of both men and women should be encouraged.
    • Workshops/Formal meetings: This channel will be used to: (i) Present Program information to
        stakeholders; (ii) Allow stakeholders to provide their views and opinions; (iii) Design participatory
        exercises to facilitate group discussions, brainstorm issues, analyze information, and develop
        recommendations and strategies; and (iv) and These meetings are focused to identify and discuss
        specific stakeholder concerns and to disclose Program/sub Program information.
    • 5) One-on-one interviews: The interviews will aim to give individuals a chance to express their
        concerns on Program and will involve PAPs and OIPs depending on the issues to be addressed.
        This helps to understand people in the context of their own lives. Such meetings should be
        available to men and women as well as vulnerable groups and individuals in a manner that would
        facilitate their attendance.
    • 6. Correspondence by phone/ email/ written letters: Distribute Program information to
        government officials, organizations, agencies, and companies and invite stakeholders to meetings
        Government officials, NGOs, CSOs, Development Partners.
    • 7) Site visits: These visits are focused on identifying and discuss stakeholder concerns and to
        disclose Program/subcomponent information within communities.
    • 8. Websites: The Program PAD and PIM, as well as the Environmental and social assessment (ESA)
        , ESCP, and SEP, Benefit Sharing Plan(BSP), Gender Action Plan (GAP), Implementation progress
        and other relevant Program documentation will be published on the official websites of MOA and
        other relevant implementing agencies for all stakeholders.




                                                                                                          11


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
4.3. Stakeholder engagement plan
This Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is designed to establish an effective platform for productive
interaction with the potentially affected parties and others with interest in the implementation outcome
of CALM2.

Table 1. Summary of the stakeholder engagement Plan




                                                                                                     12


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
Program Stage       Estimated         Topic of Consultation/ Message               Method Used                 Target Stakeholders          Responsibilities
                    Date/Time
                    Period
Program             (March-           About CALM II program orientation,           Community meeting,          Government     Entities, MoA, RBoA, ZBoA
Preparation Phase   Sep./2025)-       Program Appraisal Document (PAD), E&S        Focus Group Discussion,     Local       Community WBoA, PCU, World
                    Information       documents (SEP, ESCP, GRM, LMP, Gender       one-on-one interviews;      (including VGs, CBOs) Bank, EPA, EIO
                    dissemination     Action Plan, RFP, ESIA, ESMP, RAP)           formal meetings; and        NGOs, CSOs
                    & sharing on                                                   roundtable discussions
                    need basis
Implementation    Throughout the Regular           update        on     Program    Technical       Training,   Program       beneficiary    MoA,           RBoA/
and   supervision life cycle of the implementation Awareness/ sensitization        Participatory          &    communities, Program         BoNRM,RBoL,     ZBoA
Phase             program           on of Program direct beneficiaries about       Integrated Consultative     affected        persons;     WBoA, PCU, World
                  implementation the Program interventions, selection              meetings, workshops,        neighboring                  Bank,EPA,EIO, Women
                                    criteria, regulations (ESIA, ESMP, LMP, RAP,   Community meetings,         communities; Program         and Social Inclusion
                                    updated SEP, GRM procedures and SEA/SH         Focus Group Discussion,     workers,     government      Department,
                                    prevention plan),                              website & via social        authority (EIO, EPA,)
                                    Relevant E&S Implementation of Program         media,       information    Public     works,    civil
                                    documents         specially    SEP,    GRM,    leaflets and brochures,     society organizations,
                                    Performance of sub-Programs, grants,           poster                      religious
                                    awareness on SEA/SH, Environmental and                                     institutions/bodies,
                                    Social Risk management reports, updates                                    CSOs/NGOs          direct
                                    on Program implementation, voluntary                                       Program Beneficiaries
                                    land exchange guideline/protocol and
                                    awareness of ESS7 requirements.
Program             At the end of Achievement of Program implementation, consultative meeting, All relevant Stakeholders MoA,PCU
Completion Phase    Program        affected Program beneficiaries’ awareness media,  Community
                    implementation and participation and information sharing meeting




                                                                                                                                                  13


                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          Information will be disclosed as follows: SEP; relevant E&S documents; Grievance Redress Mechanism
          (GRM) procedures; Program orientation; regular updates on Program developments); and Information
          Dissemination in the form of Community meeting, Letter for implementer, consultation meetings;
          information leaflets and poster brochures and social media.
          Table 2. Summary of stakeholder need and communication method
Stakeholders Group                                  Disclose Type of                Method of                 Language Use
                                                    Information Disclose            Information
                                                                                    Dissemination
Affected Parties
Water shade communities, Land holders,              ESMS operational manual,        Community meeting,        As Regional Working
Farmers, Land less youth, Community                 SEP;     relevant       E&S     Letter              for   Language (Afan
Development Authority, Beneficiaries of the         documents;        Grievance     implementer,              Oromo, Amharic,
Program, Government Staff Development               Redress Mechanism (GRM)         consultation meetings;    Tigrigna, Sidama)
partners (GIZ, WB, CSOs, World Vision Agro-         procedures;    LMP,     OHS     information    leaflets   and Other as need
Pastoralists                                        Program orientation; regular    and, poster brochures     (English)
                                                    updates     on     Program      and social media
                                                    developments
Other Interested Parties
Key social institutions such as village councils,   SEP;       relevant       E&S   Website; social media,    As Regional Working
women’s groups                                      documents;          Grievance   Email/phone               Language        (Afan
Ministry of Finance and other government            Redress Mechanism (GM)          consultation meetings;    Oromo,        Amharic,
agencies,                                           procedures; OHS, Program        information    leaflets   Tigrigna, Sidama) and
Social media activists                              orientation; regular updates    and brochures             Other      as   need
Research Centre, University, ATVET                  on Program developments                                   (English)
National and International NGOs
Politician
Bank and MFI
Cooperatives, local population
Vulnerable Groups
Elderly/ Aged farmers                               ESMP, SEP; relevant E&S         One on One interview,     As Regional Working
Orphan                                              documents;        Grievance     Separate focus group      Language (Afan
Persons with disabilities and their caregivers      Redress Mechanism (GM)          meetings          with    Oromo, Amharic,
Low-income families/extreme poor and                procedures;    LMP,     OHS     vulnerable groups         Tigrigna, Sidama)
especially female headed households                 Program orientation; regular                              and Other as need
Land less youth.                                    updates     on     Program                                (local language)
Ethnic minority                                     developments
Women and girls
Chronically illness people
Seasonally migrate people




                                                                                                                    14


                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
    5. Resources and Responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement activities
    Though the Program Coordination Unit (PCU) under the Ministry of Agriculture, the PCU will be charged
    with responsibility with the coordination and implementation of the SEP. The PCU coordinator under the
    supervision of Ministry of Agriculture will coordinate the supervision of the SEP while the Social Safeguard
    specialist of the PCU will be responsible for its full implementation and report to the Program coordinator
    for the World Bank. The Specialist will on a timely basis engage with stakeholders throughout the life cycle
    of the Program.

    5.1. Resources
    The MOA PCU will be in charge of stakeholder engagement activities. The mitigation measures of the
    social and environmental risks/impacts of Program are included in the Program budget. The budget for
    implementing activities under the SEP is estimated at ETB 123.2 million equivalent 788,327 USD to and
    will be funded by the Program management coordination. The table below presents the budget
    breakdown of the activities to be implemented:
    Table 3. Budget breakdown


Budget Category                               Quantity Unit Costs Times/Years       Total Costs (ETB)    Remarks
1. Estimated staff salaries* and related expenses
                                                                    Throughout the
1.1 E&S experts at the Federal and regional
                                            Lump Sum                Program    life
level
                                                                    time             20 Million
1.2 Travel costs for staff                    Lump Sum              Quarterly       20 million
                                                                    Throughout the
1.3 Estimated salaries for Community Liaison
                                             Lump sum               Program    life                      In 10 region and
Officers]
                                                                    time            20 million           program Woreda
2. Events

2.1 Best Experience Sharing                   Lump sum              Bi- Annual      5 million
3. Communication campaigns

3.1 Posters, flyers]                          Lump sum              Annually        10milion
4. Trainings
4.1 Training n social and environmental risk
                                             Lump sum               Bi- Annual
management for PIU and contractor staff                                             5 million
4.2 Training on Community health and safety
including gender-based violence (GBV) for
                                             Lump sum               Bi- Annual
Program coordinating Unit (PcU) and
contractor staff                                                                    10 million
5. Beneficiary surveys


                                                                                                             15


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                                                 Mid Term of
                                            Lump sum
5.1 Mid-Program perception survey                                the Program 2 million
5.2 End-of-Program perception survey        Lump sum             Final Year         2 million
6. Grievance Redress Mechanism
6.1 Training of GRM committees              Lump sum             Bi- annual         10 million
6.2 Logbook, suggestion boxes in villages   Lump sum             Annual             3 million
                                                                 1st year      of
                                            Lump sum
6.3 GRM communication materials                                  Program            5 million
7. Others Expensive

Contingency 10%                                                                     11.2 million
TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET:                                                123.2 million ETB
   Note: *Salary costs can be indicative.

   5.2. Management functions and responsibilities
   The Program will be implemented using the existing government organizational structures at federal,
   regional, zonal, woreda (district) and kebele level. The program is in the MOA and is responsible for the
   overall implementation. MoA, specifically NRM sector and Program coordination unit (PCU) will be
   responsible and working together with regional government, and zonal, woreda and kebele
   administration of Tigray, Oromia, Amhara. Sidama, Central Ethiopia, South Ethiopia, Southwest Ethiopia,
   Hareri, Benshagull Gumuz, Gambella and Diredawa.

           5.2.1. The National /Federal Level
   At Federal level, the MoA Senior Management Team together with CALM II- Coordination Team
   will ensure compliance of ESS10; Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure (SEID) as
   follows:
        • Providing technical support and capacity building to Regional, woreda, and Kebele officials
            including the Community and other Stakeholders on the implementations of SEP.
        • Monitoring and evaluation of the impacts of SEP at the Regional and woreda offices and
            community levels.
        • Prepare progress reports on the implementation of SEP.
        • Establishment and maintenance of effective M and E systems including grievance database at this
            level and,
        • Knowledge management and learning as far as SEP is concerned.
   At federal level, the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) will take overall responsibility for the Program
   implementation. In order to oversee and coordinate the development and implementation of the
   National Framework technical committee and steering have been established.
   The members are composed from: - Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Women and
   Children Affairs, Environmental Protection Authority, Ethiopian Institution of Ombudsman, Ethiopian,


                                                                                                         16


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Institute of Agricultural Research, Federal Cooperative Agency, Regional Bureau of Agriculture, Regional
CALM II program Coordinators, Development partners of CALM.

CALM II-SC responsibilities include:

    •   Providing policy guidance, standardizing and harmonizing legal and technical matters.
    •   Oversight and overall supervision for Program implementation.
    •   Reviewing and approval of the consolidated annual work plan, budget and procurement plan at
        national level.
    • Reviewing and approving the annual implementation performance report; and
    • Overseeing the execution of any corrective actions that will be taken.
    The key stakeholder’s engagement in the implementation of the program as follows.

Environmental Protection Authority
    ➢ Responsible for ensuring the ESMS objectives and principles indicated in the ESMS operational
       manual are implemented.
    ➢ Review site specific instrument including the ESMP and ESMS Audit
    ➢ MoUs Signing between the implementing agencies for the operationalization of an ESMS
    ➢ Organize ESMS operational report from regional EPA
    ➢ Strengthen and support regional EPA to coordinate with the program

Ethiopian Institution of Ombudsman
Responsible for overseeing grievances, especially related to land disputes, watershed management and
cooperatives related conflict rais among individuals/groups. EIO works closely with the RLAU and NRM of
the Ministry and the regional structures. Responsible for overall GRM procedure and related activities
Women and social Affairs
    • Responsible for ensuring effective implementation of gender mainstreaming in the program,
        avoidance of biases to vulnerable group and ethnic minorities issues, and their active
        participation in the two result areas of the program.
    • Within MoA, the Scope of Work of the Women and Social Affairs Section (Focal Person Assigned
        from the Department) which is responsible fully for CALM-GESI issues will include the following
        activities:
    • Facilitate Capacity Building on Mainstreaming Cross-Cutting Issues (On Gender and Social
        Inclusion etc)
    • Coordinate with the Departments, and other CALM Program stakeholders and monitor the
        progress of implementation of the GESI action plan
    • Review the progress, monitor, and report the operational status of the GESI action plan on a
        regular basis.
    • Revise checklists, forms, and formats for all levels based on the GESI action plan.
    • Facilitate the GESI issues related to changes in guidelines, acts, regulations, directives, etc which
        are related to the activities of Watershed management and CALM Program.
    • Working in Collaboration with Federal Level CALM Program Stakeholders

                                                                                                        17


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
5.2.2. The Regional Level
The responsibilities of the Regional Program Coordination (R-PCU) Unit will be to supervise the
implementation of the Program at the local government levels in respective Regions including:
    • Coordination of SEP implementation at the woredas, kebeles and community.
    • Monitor and evaluate the impact of SEP within their regions.
    • Prepare progress reports on the implementation of SEP from within their regions.
    • Coordinating communications to the woreda, and kebele officials and leaders on their
        responsibilities with the approved funding from the World Bank ESMF and SEP.
The R-PCU will be responsible for ensuring all stakeholders are engaged in the Program activities in their
respective areas; specific responsibilities on the SEP will be as follows:
    • Awareness creation at kebele levels about the CALM II, SEP and GRMs.
    • Providing technical assistance to communities as needed in the implementation of the SEP.
    • Receiving and developing resolution of grievances as required.
    • Ensuring that the CALM II and this SEP is mainstreamed into woreda and kebele Annual plans.
    • Participating in the planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the Sub – Programs
        at local/ water shade community levels.
    • Prepare progress reports on the implementation of CALM II; and
    • Monitoring and evaluation planning and implementation of the Stakeholders engagements.
    • Ensuring if there is a budget for SEP and the environmental and social management of the
    • CALM II in the community
        5.2.3. Woreda levels
The Woreda and Kebele entities will be responsible for ensuring all stakeholders are engaged in the
Program activities in their respective areas. Specific responsibilities will be:
   • Awareness creation in the community about SEP and GRMs.
   • Facilitating meetings in the communities which involve all stakeholders.
   • Participating in the planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of sub-Program at the
       kebele level.
   • Establishing and maintaining database for the Stakeholders engagement.
   • Address grievances at the community levels.
    •   The stakeholder engagement activities will be documented through quarterly and annual
        progress reports and shared with the MoA World Bank.


        5.2.4. Kebele Level
Kebele Administration: Kebele administration, the lowest unit in the government administrative
structure, will serve as a vital bridge between farmers and the Program, and will ensure effective farmer’s
participation in the Program implementation. The kebele cabinet will be responsible for facilitating and
supporting the communities in planning and implementation at the community level. It will also be
responsible for supervising the community works and the deployment of the DAs in support of Program


                                                                                                         18


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
implementation. The Kebele Administrator will sign agreement with CWT on-behalf of the government
(Program input distribution and execution of activities) in line with the agreed norms.
A Kebele Watershed Team (KWT) will be established as per the CBPWD Guidelines. KWT will include the
Kebele Chairman, Kebele Rural Development Head, DAs assigned to the kebele, one male
representative/leader of each community (gott,), one female representative/leader of each community
(gott), one respected and influential person from each community (gott.), and a youth representative.
The share of female committee members will be 50%. The Kebele Chairman will serve as the chair of the
KWT with the DA as secretary; it will meet at least once a week. The KWT will ensure coordination
between the kebele and communities for specific activities of common interest and benefit including SLM
activities.
The Keble Land Administration and Use Committee/KLAUC will be established based on regional land
laws. Active participation of the KLAUC in the field is irreplaceable. One of the benefits of the endorsed
method of land surveying is that it is participatory and the KLAUCs work as the representatives of the
community. Hence, the committee will involve in boundary demarcation, in adjudication of rights of
holders, particularly, in protecting the right of women and vulnerable groups. The committee will play a
critical role in resolving conflicts and in facilitating the work for the field teams. Essentially parcel or
kebele boundary demarcation must be undertaken in the presence of the landholder, the neighbors, the
field teams, the KLAUC and whenever necessary in the presence of elders and woreda/kebele land
administration experts.
5.2.5. Community Level
Community Watershed Team (CWT): Being the primary beneficiaries of the Program, the farming
communities will be encouraged to participate fully in all aspects of the Program including identification,
preparation, work planning, implementation, monitoring and reporting, operation and maintenance.
Using MoA’s CBPWD Guideline, the communities will be made to elect their representatives and active
members of each of the social groups to form a Community Watershed Team (CWT). The CWT will work
closely with kebeles and Watershed User Association/SHG and individual beneficiaries for specific
activities of common interest and benefit including SLM activities. In general, the CWT membership will
include:
    • Community leader (also representing the community at kebele level),
    • Four male-headed households representing different social groups (including vulnerable) and
         living in different parts of the community,
    • Four female-headed households representing different social groups (including vulnerable) and
         living in different strata of the community (down to top), One youth representative, one religious
         representative, Others as required by the community (innovative farmers, respected people,
         women's group, etc.) and Female committee members should be 50%.
The CWT will be assisted by the DA and the CF on a day-to-day basis. The CWT will be chaired by the
elected beneficiary, with the CF serving as its secretary and meeting at least twice a week. KWT will
support CWT in providing guidance and problem resolution. The ground planning and execution of
activities under the Program will be undertaken jointly by WTC, KWT, KLAUCs, Development Agents (DAs),
Community Facilitators (CFs) and communities. Thus, WTCs, KWTs, KLAUCs, DAs and CFs will assist
communities in: Developing annual work plans and budgets for submission to the regions for


                                                                                                         19


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
       endorsement and integration into the regions’ work plans and budgets; Facilitating community
       participation in watershed planning and rehabilitation; Provide training; Monitoring and evaluation;
       Dissemination of innovations in SLM; Approving the quality and quantity of the work in the watershed;
       and WTC would also be responsible for the facilitation of the land certification, administration and Land
       Use Planning (LUP) activities at the woreda and kebele levels, WTC would also be responsible for the
       facilitation of environmental and social safeguards, gender mainstreaming issues at woreda and kebele
       level. The stakeholder engagement activities will be documented through quarterly and annual progress
       reports and shared with the World Bank.
       6. Grievance Redress Mechanism
       The IPF component will result potential grievances related to the key social risks of the Program,
       including:
         • workers’ conditions if the client employed consultants for the land productivity assessment (ESS2),
         • SEA/SH resulting from the consultant’s engagement (ESS4).
         • Lack of proper consultation during the preparation of the E&S instruments (ESS7 & ESS10).
         • Inequalities in benefit-sharing among stakeholders (including the historically underserved and
         vulnerable groups) due to their gender other vulnerability factors (ESS7).
         • Land use conflicts associated with change on the land use and landscape management
         (downstream impact of the land productivity assessment).
         • Exclusion smallholders from participating in carbon asset generation; and
         • Exclusion of vulnerable women and youth for alternative livelihood grant support.
       The main objective of a GM is to assist to resolve complaints and grievances in a timely, effective, and
       efficient manner that satisfies all parties involved.
       6.1. Description of GM
       Table 4. Description of GM
Step            Description of Process                                           Time Frame       Responsibility
GM              GM at Community Watershed and Kebele Level First Within                     5/7 -Kebele GRM
implementat     Complaint Form will be completed by any interested person or days               committee
ion structure   complainant and submitted to the community watershed                            - Kebele Land
                team/KLAC. Second, the community watershed team/KLAC will                       Administration
                review, investigate and discuss on the issue and resolve the                    Committees (KLAC)
                issues. If it’s complex, case will transfer to woreda

                GM at Woreda_ The appeal or complaint received and records Within 15 days BoWoAgri/BoWoNR
                the issues in the registry, assess the appeal or the grievance and        M/BoWoL
                will organize meeting(s) for a Woreda steering committee/GRM
                committee. They will review the decision given at Kebele
                watershed committee/KLAC level and endorse it if it is
                appropriate otherwise if the appeal is valid, the Woreda
                steering committee will resolve the issue and give final decision.




                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
Step          Description of Process                                             Time Frame   Responsibility
              All meetings will be recorded, and copies of the minutes will be
              provided to all concerned stakeholders. If the complaint will
              complex, it transfer to court.

Grievance     Grievances can be submitted via the following channels:
uptake         •   [e.g.Toll-free telephone hotline/Short Message Service
                   (SMS) line
               •   E-mail
               •   Letter to Grievance focal points at local facilities
               •   Complaint form to be lodged via any of the above channels
               •   Walk-ins may register a complaint in a grievance logbook at
                   a facility or suggestion box]
Sorting,      Any complaint received is forwarded to GRM committee, Upon receipt Local grievance focal
processing    logged in registry book, and categorized according to the of complaint points
              following complaint types: Land holding right( boarder dispute,
              encroachment, loss of land right…); GBV/SH, Corruption and
              fraud, working condition/ Labour condition as well as
              complaints related to exclusion and discrimination .

Acknowledg    Receipt of the grievance is acknowledged to the complainant by Within 2 days Local grievance focal
ment      and GRM committee                                                  of receipt    points
follow-up

Verification,  Investigation of the complaint is led by GRM committee. A Within       10 Complaint
investigation, proposed resolution will be formulated by letter/minute and working days  Committee
action         communicate to the complainant by phone/letter                            composed of E and S
                                                                                         focal person,
                                                                                         Woreda NR/LA
                                                                                         expert/ coordinator
                                                                                         and DA

Monitoring    Data on complaints will collect in checklist/grievance box and 5 working days Woreda CALM
and           report to WBoA/NR/LA every week                                               Coordinator, E and S
evaluation                                                                                  focal person,
                                                                                            WBoA/NR/LA expert

Provision of Feedback from complainants regarding their satisfaction with During              Woreda CALM
feedback     complaint resolution will collect verbally and record to complaint               Coordinator, E and S
             document.                                                    resettled           focal person,
                                                                                              WBoA/NR/LA expert



                                                                                                        21


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
The GM will provide an appeals process if the complainant is not satisfied with the proposed resolution
of the complaint. Once all possible means to resolve the complaint have been proposed and if the
complainant is still not satisfied, then they should be advised of their right to legal recourse.
The Program will have other measures in place to handle sensitive and confidential complaints, including
those related to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Harassment (SEA/SH) in line with the World Bank ESF
Good Practice Note on SEA/SH.
The Program may result in incidences of Gender Based Violence (GBV) and Sexual Exploitation, Abuse,
and Harassment (SEA/SH) affecting workers and the community. GBV/SEA/SH cases are different from
other complaints that are typically handled through a separate grievance redress mechanism. When
reporting allegations of GBV/SEA/SH cases will be put in place with its own channels and procedures for
receiving and managing and will focus in particular on the secure and confidential referencing of cases to
identified GBV service providers. Woreda Grievance Redress Committee and Kebele Grievance Redress
Committee should integrate mechanisms to track complaints related to SEA/SH/GBV, including a feedback
system for regular and timely feedback on actions taken to respond to complaints. These mechanisms
should protect confidentiality of individuals without compromising access to justice, while also enabling
links to referral pathways and local organizations for support services. Mechanisms should include
development of a protocol outlining reporting procedures and an appropriate timeline for response
actions, depending on the severity of the allegation.
For the GRM to effectively address the issues/incidents related to sexual exploitation and other forms of
gender-based violence, the program in general and the Woreda level GRM committee must set proactive
mechanism functional throughout the Program cycle. In this regard, the respective Woreda Women,
Youth and Children Affairs Office head will be the focal point on issues related with sexual exploitation
and other forms of gender-based violence. The following will be considered as a working procedure for
the Woreda GRM to handle GBV in the Program area.
    • The respective Woreda Women, Youth and Children Affairs Office (WoWYCA) will get the capacity
         building training on key principles of GBV/SEA/SH case management including confidentiality,
         non-judgmental, best interest of the survivor, services and referrals.
    • The Program will establish a proper channel to receive reports or Program-related risks of sexual
         harassment and GBV i.e. the risk factors that exacerbate or expose people to GBV; Conduct
         awareness raising campaign regarding the risks of GBV to both men and women in the Program
         area; and key principles of GBV/SEA/SH case management including confidentiality, non-
         judgmental, best interest of the survivor, services and referrals.
    • The respective WWYCA representative in the Woreda GRC will be the focal person and receive
         complaints or reports from the survivors through various forms of uptake channels including
         telephone call (hot line if any), text message, email, face-to-face, and others.
    • The WWYCA will immediately (maximum 24 hours) communicate the complaint to CALM-PCU.
         Whereas the Federal PCU will report the case to the World Bank.
    • The WWYCA will not investigate the GBV/SEA/SH case. Rather, it will maintain the key case
         management principles of GBV/SEA/SH including confidentiality, non-judgmental, best interest of



                                                                                                       22


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
         the survivor. Then, it will report the case to respective FSRP-CUs and facilitate survivors to services
         and referrals.
    • The GBV/SEA/SH case will be investigated, and further information will be collected by
         GBV/SEA/SH specialists based on the scope of risk involved.
    • Record all the reported incidents based on the level of risks and follow-up or track the response
         process of the referred agency or court until the achievement of satisfactory resolution
About Labour grievances, community workers will use the community level appeal system and for civil
servants and Contract staff Grievance Redress Mechanism for public sector, handled by committee of
the institution their contract is managed under, the Federal Civil Servants Proclamation No. 1064/2017
Article 76 has laid down mechanisms and procedure for grievance handling within the internal structure
of government institutions. The Labor GM should be described in detail in the Labor Management
Procedures.
The World Bank and the Borrower do not tolerate reprisals and retaliation against Program stakeholders
who share their views about Bank-financed Programs.

7. Monitoring
7.1. Summary of how SEP implementation will be monitored and reported
During implementation, monitoring will be done on quarterly basis by Federal and regional E&S
specialists, whereby stakeholders will be invited on rotational basis. At each site visit, technical advice on
issues observed will be provided at the site and back to office report submitted to the CALM II-CU, and
feedback will be given in written form to the Regional CALM II Coordination units. During Program
implementation, the SEP will be periodically updated, as necessary, and consistent with the requirements
of ESS10, in a manner acceptable to the Bank. Any major changes to the program related activities and to
its schedule will be duly reflected in the SEP. The CALM II PCU will prepare and submit bi-annual and
annual SEP implementation reports including ESHS performance and other environment and social
instruments of the Program, including the grievance redress mechanism. The bi-annual report summaries
will provide a mechanism for assessing both the number and the nature of complaints and requests for
information, along with the Programs’ ability to address those in a timely and effective manner.

CALM II will develop and maintain an Environmental and Social information system detailing all
environmental and social documentation, public consultation information disclosure and grievances
collected throughout the program, which will be available for public review. Stakeholder engagement
shall be periodically evaluated by Federal- CALM -PCU. The following indicators will be used for evaluation

    ➢ Meeting one month before construction commences and one week before completion to
      measure the level of understanding of the Program stakeholders and identify any potential issues.
    ➢ Prepare an annual report of the annual grievances received and how they have been addressed;
      and
    ➢ Establish a database (record) file at the district level of involvement of beneficiaries and affected
      people in each committee and joint activities and in the Program itself. In order to measure these
      indicators, the following data will be used:
              •   Issues and management responses linked to minutes of meetings.

                                                                                                             23


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
             •   Monthly reports.
             •   Feedback from primary stakeholder groups (through interviews with sample of affected
                 people).
             •   Annual Environmental and Social Auditor’ Report.
             •   Grievance registered and resolved.

7.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups
The SEP will be periodically revised and updated as necessary during Program implementation. Bi-annual
summaries and internal reports on public grievances, enquiries, and related incidents, together with the
status of implementation of associated corrective/preventive actions, will be collated by responsible staff
and referred to the senior management of the Program. The biannual summaries report will provide a
mechanism for assessing both the number and nature of complaints and requests for information, along
with the Program’s ability to address those in a timely and effective manner. Information on public
engagement activities undertaken by the Program during the year may be conveyed to the stakeholders
in various ways: (i) publication of annual report on Program’s stakeholder engagement; and (ii)
Information will be disclosed in website to relevant stakeholders/use email for regular monitoring of the
Program.
Stakeholders will be kept informed as the Program develops, including reporting on Program
environmental and social performance and implementation of the stakeholder engagement plan and
Grievance Redress Mechanism, and on Program’s overall implementation progress.

The main instrument for reporting on SEP implementation will be the Bi-annual ESF implementation
progress report, which would cover implementation of the GRM, GESI, ESMS, ESCP as well as the SEP. The
biannual report will be based on regular monthly and quarterly updates, and these will include public
grievances, enquiries, and related incidents, together with the status of implementation of associated
corrective/preventative. These periodic updates will provide a mechanism for assessing both the number
and the nature of complaints and requests for information, along with the Program’s ability to address
those in a timely and effective manner. The Program will be using reporting format products on the GRM,
GESI, ESMS, OHS and the SEP status. The Program will also conduct monitoring and survey to assess the
effectiveness of the engagement process. The questions will be designed as appropriate for the relevant
audience.

Annex 1. Grievance application form

ቀቀ……………………………

በበበበ በበበበ በበበበበበ በበበበ በበበበበ በበበበበበ በበበበበ (CALM II)

በበበበ በበበበበ በበ

    1. ቀቀቀቀ ቀቀቀቀ ቀቀ ………………………………………………………
        ቀቀቀቀቀቀ ቀቀቀ ቀቀቀ …………………………………………………………………..


                                                                                                        24


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
      ቀቀቀ…………………………………….ቀቀ…………………………………………
      ቀቀቀ ቀቀቀቀ ቀቀ………………………………………………………………………….
   2. ቀቀቀቀቀ                                           ቀቀቀቀ
      …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
      …………………………………………………………………...
      ………………………………………………………………………………
   3. ቀቀቀቀ       ቀቀቀቀ       (ቀቀቀቀ      ቀቀቀቀቀ       ቀቀቀቀቀቀ)
      …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
      …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
      …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
      .
   4. ቀቀቀቀ       ቀቀቀቀቀ          ቀቀቀቀቀቀቀ       ቀቀቀቀቀቀ  ቀቀቀቀ
      …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
      ………………ANNEX.....……………………………………………………………


   5. ቀቀቀቀ           ቀቀቀቀ             ቀቀ………………………………………………..
      ቀቀቀ……………………………………………..ቀቀ…………………………..…..…………..



Annex 2. Grievance application form

Date ……………………………

Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (CALM II)

Grievance submission form

   1. Name ………………………………………………………
      Place – woreda …………………………………………………………………..
      Kebele …………………………………….Gote …………………………………………
      Name of the watershed ………………………………………………………………………….
   2. Description of the Grievance
      …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
      …………………………………………………………………...
      ………………………………………………………………………………
   3. Cause of the grievance (Based on the opinion of the complainant
      )………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
      …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………



                                                                                  25


                                                                                 Official Use Only
   …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
   ….
4. Ask of the complainant(to be done by the client0
   …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
   ………………ANNEX.....……………………………………………………………

5. Name of the person received the grievance ………………………………………………..
Signature ……………………………………………..Date…………………………..…..…………..




                                                                     26


                                                                    Official Use Only
