Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                         The World Bank
                                                                         LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)



                                                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure _For
                  Authorized          Public Disclosure Authorized




                       Official Use Only_
                                                                                     Project Information Document (PID)

                                                                                    Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Jun-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01358




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data
                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
                          Lao People's Democratic        P510690                     LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT
                          Republic                                                   PROJECT II
                          Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          15-Oct-2025                 12-Mar-2026                   Urban, Resilience and Land
                          Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
                          Investment Project             Lao People's Democratic     Department of Planning -
                          Financing (IPF)                Republic (Lao PDR)          Ministry of Planning and
                                                                                     Investment, Department




_For Official Use Only_
                                                                                     of State-Owned Enterprises
                                                                                     and Insurance Supervision
                                                                                     (SOEI) - Ministry of
                                                                                     Finance, Department of
                                                                                     Waterways - Ministry of
                                                                                     Public Works and
                                                                                     Transport, Department of
                                                                                     Meteorology and
                                                                                     Hydrology - Ministry of
                                                                                     Natural Resources and
                                                                                     Environment

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Enhance flood resilience in target areas and strengthen the Government’s capacity for hydro-meteorological services
                          and financing post-disaster response.

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                         60.00



                                                                                                                                            Page 1



                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)



                             Total Financing                                                                                                60.00
                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                  60.00
                             Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  60.00
                                 IDA Credit                                                                                                 60.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
                          Environmental and Social Risk Classification                   Concept Review Decision




_For Official Use Only_
                          Substantial                                                    The review did authorize the preparation to continue




                           Other Decision (as needed)

                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context
                          1.      The Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR) is a lower middle-income country that continues to grapple
                          with significant economic and financial challenges following the unprecedented and cascading shocks from COVID-19 .
                          As the only land-locked country in Southeast Asia, Lao PDR has a population of just over 7.6 million people and a GDP of
                          about US$15.8 billion. The country’s economic growth has primarily been driven by debt-financed capital-intensive sectors
                          such as mining and hydropower, which have created limited job opportunities, tax revenues, or productivity spillovers. A
                          high share of the population – 70 percent – remains employed in agriculture. Lao PDR had already been experiencing a
                          gradual economic slowdown when its economy was hit particularly hard by the COVID-19 pandemic leading to its slowest
                          GDP growth in 30 years, reduced tax revenue, increased public debt, and downgrades in its sovereign credit rating,
                          particularly affecting tourism, handicrafts, and manufacturing sectors. Inflation remains above 20 percent, and the
                          currency continues to depreciate. The cost of debt servicing doubled during 2023 to US$950 million (equivalent to 55
                          percent of government revenue), significantly limiting the fiscal space available to the government to make priority
                          investments. Growing multi-hazard risks and cascading shocks due to natural hazard-related events, epidemics, and rising
                          food prices make poverty reduction efforts more challenging.
                          2.       Lao PDR’s frequent exposure to severe natural hazards, compounded by impacts of climate change, has caused
                          significant economic damage, with large implications for people, infrastructure, and ecosystems. According to the
                          International Emergency Events Database, a total of 31 natural hazard disasters were registered in the country from 2000
                          to 2024 – mostly floods and storms – affecting almost 4.3 million people and causing economic damage of more than US$
                          595 million (EM-DAT, 2025). While flooding is responsible for most of these economic impacts, the country is also exposed
                          to landslides, droughts, seismic hazards and is the most unexploded ordnance (UXO) affected country in the world. In

                                                                                                                                                Page 2



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                          addition to injuries and loss of life, such disaster events frequently impose large financial costs on the government,
                          business and households, particularly from damage to infrastructure, diminished economic production, loss of livelihoods,
                          population displacement, and increased risk of disease outbreak. Disasters exacerbate existing inequalities and have a
                          disproportionate impact on vulnerable populations such as the country’s ethnic minorities, urban poor, female-headed
                          households, rural communities with lack of connectivity through road access, and persons with disabilities.
                          3.      Fluvial (or riverine) flooding is the most common form of flooding across Lao PDR, but flash floods can also occur
                          in the northern mountainous regions of the country. Approximately 80 percent of Lao PDR's terrain is mountainous, with
                          the remaining 20 percent consisting of low-lying plains along the Mekong River. The Mekong River floods seasonally and
                          the annual flood pulse in the lower river basin endangers lives and damages infrastructure, human settlements, and
                          essential services in these plains, especially during August and September. Annual expected losses from flood events in
                          the country range between 2.8 and 3.6 percent of GDP1. The river basin hydrology leads to extreme flooding in one portion
                          of the basin, with average or below-average water levels prevailing elsewhere. While flooding is part of the Mekong River’s
                          annual cycle, it has become more frequent and intense due to a combination of climate change and unregulated releases
                          of water from an increasing number of hydropower and irrigation dams across the basin. Occasionally, flash flooding has
                          been caused by dam failure, as happened in 2018 with the collapse of an auxiliary dam of the Xe Pian-Xe Namnoy
                          hydropower project, leaving over 70 people dead and thousands displaced. Laos has a high number of dams which have




_For Official Use Only_
                          the potential to increase risks associated with extreme flooding if not managed effectively.
                          4.       The predicted impacts of climate change will likely amplify the severity and frequency of extreme weather
                          events in Laos, including flooding, drought and heat stress. Compared to 2020, the temperature in Lao PDR could rise by
                          about +1°C by 2050 in an optimistic scenario (SSP1-RCP2.6), and by more than 4 °C by 2100 under a pessimistic scenario
                          (SSP5-RCP8.5). Annual maximum and minimum temperatures are expected to rise 10–20 percent faster than average,
                          likely exacerbating stresses on human health, livelihoods, and ecosystems. As the climate warms in Lao PDR, annual
                          precipitation rates are expected to increase in the long term (ranging from 100 to 170 mm by 2100) but with a high degree
                          of uncertainty. In the near term, the intensity of short-term extreme rainfall events is projected to rise with increasing
                          temperatures, with rainfall accumulation during such events expected to increase by 23 percent under the most
                          pessimistic scenario. These changes have already led to occurrences of flash and surface flooding, as well as landslides in
                          some regions. Changing precipitation patterns are also expected to alter river flows in the Mekong and its tributaries,
                          increasing the frequency of extreme river flows. Events that historically occurred once every 100 years could become
                          more frequent, occurring once every 50 or even 25 years. Projected decreases in rainfall outside the wet season are likely
                          to lead to more severe drought periods with implications for agriculture and hydropower generation. In addition to
                          changing climatic conditions, increasing urbanization, land-use changes, and infrastructure development alter the spatial
                          and temporal patterns of natural hazards and communities’ vulnerability to these events.
                          5.      To reduce disaster impacts, a comprehensive approach with pre- and post-disaster measures is needed. In
                          particular, resilient infrastructure, early warning, and post-disaster financing are needed to protect development gains
                          and support economic growth. While Lao PDR is still mostly a rural country (with 38 percent living in urban areas), the
                          country is urbanizing rapidly. Between 2005 and 2015, the country experienced the highest rate of urbanization (5.36
                          percent) among Southeast Asian nations, driven by economic policies and increased rural-to-urban migration. If not
                          managed, urbanization will lead to an accumulation of people and assets in hazardous areas and unsafe structures. At the
                          same time, investments in early warning systems, which have been proven to have a high return rate, are needed to
                          protect the livelihoods of communities and mitigate agricultural and other shocks in the event of a disaster. Finally, the
                          Government of Lao PDR (GoL) needs additional fiscal buffers to finance disaster response and recovery efforts, and also
                          to provide scalable and adaptable support to the most vulnerable in post disaster situations.

                          1 Government of Lao People’s Democratic Republic. 2018. “Post-Disaster Needs Assessment 2018 Floods, Lao PDR.”

                          https://laopdr.un.org/sites/default/files/2019-08/2018%20PDNA_English.pdf.

                                                                                                                                                   Page 3



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                          6.       The proposed SEADRM II project follows the predecessor Lao PDR Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management
                          Project (SEADRM, P160930) and Additional Finance (P170945). With a closing date of December 2025, the SEADRM
                          project is on track to deliver critical project development outcomes, including (i) construction of more than 15 kilometers
                          of riverbank protection, (ii) protecting more than 40,000 people from flood risk, (iii) modernization of the national
                          hydrometeorological monitoring and observation network with the installation of 70 new hydromet stations and
                          lightening detection systems, (iv) development of an integrated data management system to strengthen national capacity
                          to deliver reliable and timely weather forecasts, and (iv) providing access to sovereign disaster risk insurance, which has
                          been used to support response to two flood disasters. Despite the progress to strengthen disaster resilience across these
                          physical, technical, and financial dimensions, the needs across these areas of investment remain high.

                           Sectoral and Institutional Context
                          7.      GoL has made significant progress in laying the foundation for disaster risk management (DRM) through the
                          adoption of key legislative, policy and strategy documents. The Disaster Management Law of 2019 and the National
                          Strategy on Disaster Risk Reduction (NSDRR) 2021-2030 serve to lay the foundation for the planning and coordination of
                          disaster response and preparedness as it relates to natural hazards. The Lao Red Cross Law in 2017, the Law on Water and
                          Water Resources in 2017, the Law on Meteorology and Hydrology No. 36/NA, the Decree on Social Welfare, the Resilience
                          Framework 2022-2025, the Decree on Climate Change 2019, and the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) 2021 are




_For Official Use Only_
                          some other associated legal guiding references that support the DRM agenda.
                          8.       The National Disaster Management Committee (NDMC) has general oversight of all phases of disaster and risk
                          management in coordination with various international, national, public, and private bodies. The NDMC is an
                          interministerial and cross-sectoral body chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister. The National Disaster Management Office
                          (NDMO) led by the Department of Social Welfare (DSW) of the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare (MLSW) functions as
                          the secretariat for the NDMC and is the central hub for disaster management activities including implementation of
                          policies, strategies, measures, laws, regulations, plans, programs and projects. The country also has a tiered and
                          decentralized system with Disaster Management Committees (DMCs) established at all lower levels of government
                          including provincial, district and village. The Disaster Management Law represented a significant shift in focus from solely
                          post disaster response and recovery to ex-ante activities such as risk reduction and disaster prevention. Following on from
                          the legislation, the NSDRR 2021-2030 aims to (i) prevent and reduce disaster risks, (ii) prepare and coordinate for
                          emergency response, and (iii) restore economic, social and environmental infrastructure after a disaster.
                          9.        The GoL recognizes that mainstreaming disaster risk management and climate resilience across sectoral plans
                          is critical to achieving its long-term development goals. It has made considerable efforts to enhance the country’s ability
                          to cope with climate and disaster risks, by systematically embedding these priorities in national and sectoral development
                          plans, including the country’s five-year National Socio-Economic Development Plans (NSEDPs). Specifically, the 9th NSEDP
                          2021-2025 includes a dedicated objective on enhancing environmental protection and reducing disaster risks (Outcome
                          4: Environmental protection enhanced and disaster risks reduced). This includes priority activities across urban planning
                          with focus on strong infrastructure that is resilient to climate change and natural disasters (Output 2: Green growth
                          promoted and actions taken towards climate change mitigation), improving hydromet and early warning systems and
                          ensuring disaster risk insurance (Output 3: Capacities for disaster prevention, management and recovery enhanced). Part
                          of the NDMC’s responsibilities includes the oversight of the mainstreaming and integration of disaster management issues
                          into sectoral development plans.
                          10.      Many disaster risk management functions are being specified and integrated within and across broader national
                          entities collaborating with the disaster risk reduction agenda to make them more relevant and effective. Given its broad
                          scope, disaster risk management responsibilities have application across most, if not all, government ministries, however
                          it is worth highlighting the roles of specific ministries. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) is the main financing body for disaster
                          management and is responsible for ensuring line ministries address disaster risk reduction initiatives as part of the

                                                                                                                                                     Page 4



                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                          government’s central planning processes, including through the five-year NSEDPs. The Ministry of Agriculture and
                          Environment (MAE), through the Department of Meteorology and Hydrology (DMH), is responsible for the installation,
                          maintenance, and operation of a hydrometeorological observation network and the production and delivery of flood
                          forecasts and early warnings. Since significant disaster damages and losses fall under the purview of the Ministry of Public
                          Works and Transport (MPWT) in the transport, waterways, and urban planning sectors, it is a key ministry for both
                          responding to and mitigating the potential impacts of disasters.
                          Flood Risk Management
                          11.     There are over ten departments within the MPWT, with the Department of Waterways (DOW) responsible for
                          the construction of flood control structures close to rivers in urban areas, the protection of riverbanks, and the land-
                          use and management of areas along rivers. DOW also works closely with the Department of Housing and Urban Planning
                          (DHUP), which is responsible for urban planning and building design and the Department of Roads (DOR), responsible for
                          the management of landslides affecting roads. Additionally, the Public Works and Transport Institute (PTI) plays a key role
                          in research and evaluation and supports all departments with environmental and social safeguard monitoring and
                          community engagement.
                          12.      For over a decade, DOW has been developing and continually updating its strategic vision and development
                          plans, however large gaps exist in implementation due to fiscal constraints. In its five-year investment plan (2016–21),




_For Official Use Only_
                          DOW included the flood protection of Muang Xay, the capital of Oudomxay Province, as one of its highest priorities.
                          Following on from this, DOW, with support from the Korean Government, developed a Master Plan for Integrated Flood
                          Management in Lao PDR focusing on the Mekong River and its main tributaries. The Master Plan assessed the technical
                          and economic feasibility of an additional twenty-two project interventions across the country for flood protection. The
                          most recent five-year investment plan (2021–25) highlights that while only a small number of these projects have been
                          financed and a large percentage of the country’s main waterways still pose significant erosion and flood risk. Given the
                          fiscal and budget constraints within the GoL, flood protection infrastructure investments over the years have increasingly
                          relied on financial assistance from major donors and development partners such as the World Bank, ADB, JICA, and Korean
                          EDCF. According to the most recent DOW investment plan (under preparation), the financing needs for priority
                          investments still remain high. The NSDRR 2021-2030 also emphasizes the need for additional investment in structural
                          measures for flood and landslide protection along riverbanks.
                          Early Warning Systems
                          13.      Lao PDR has comprehensive regulations and frameworks for Early Warnings Systems (EWS) with clearly defined
                          roles and responsibilities. The regulations on EWS are outlined in the Disaster Management Law of 2019, the Early
                          Warning Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) of 2017, and covered in the NSDRR 2021-2030. According to the
                          regulations, early warnings are delivered from national to sub-national level and the warning shall refer to information on
                          forecasting, monitoring, and prediction for the concerned sectors. DMH operating under the MAE is the mandated
                          institution for all meteorological observations, issuing of severe weather warnings, climate products as well as providing
                          information for climate and disaster risk reduction services to a wide range of sectors. DMH is also responsible for water
                          level monitoring and flood monitoring and forecasting for major rivers in the country. The DSW under the MOLSW has a
                          key communication role in issuing and disseminating early warning information, including through the Provincial Disaster
                          Management Committees (PDMC), District Disaster Management Committees (DDMC), and Village Disaster Management
                          Committees (VDMC), and in coordinating flood forecasting information received from the DMH.
                          14.     Despite recent advancements, Lao PDR still lacks effective end-to-end EWS that can predict several types of
                          disasters and advance preparedness measures to protect the lives and livelihoods of people. Over the last ten years,
                          DMH has undergone significant upgrades by modernizing observation infrastructure and strengthening forecasting
                          systems (establishing over 160 stations, with 70 new hydromet stations installed under the first SEADRM project).
                          However, the observational infrastructure suffers from a lack of consistency and maintenance, attributed to both lack of


                                                                                                                                                  Page 5



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                          decentralized technical capacity and constrained financial resources given that stations are sparsely distributed across the
                          country. At the national level, there is also a need to strengthen the capacity to turn forecast information into localized
                          and actionable early warning information to support various agencies and end-users from different sectors. Government
                          officials from the provincial, district and village level need capacity building support to learn how to maintain and operate
                          observational stations, as well as how to interpret and transmit early warnings to communities. And at the community
                          level, many people cannot access information quickly and in time. There is a strong need to support dissemination and
                          communication efforts so that risk information reaches all those who need it, preparedness and community response
                          activities. The NSDRR 2021-2030 strongly emphasizes the need for strengthening information and early warning
                          transmission system to communities. Lao PDR has been selected as a one of the pilot countries for UN’s Early Warning 4
                          All (EW4All) Initiative where a National Roadmap (2024-2027) has been prepared with DMH and DSW as focal agencies
                          for implementation.
                          Disaster Risk Financing
                          15.      The GoL remains severely exposed to large financial losses from natural disasters and the resultant impacts on
                          fiscal planning, economic stability, and the wellbeing of its population. The Government has largely been using risk
                          retention instruments such as reserve funds and contingency budget allocations to respond to such disaster shocks. The
                          National Contingency Fund and the State Reserve Fund, both overseen by the MOF’s Department of Budget are the main




_For Official Use Only_
                          disaster risk funding sources administered by GoL. Financing from other sources such as the Social Welfare Fund
                          (administered by the MLSW) and the disaster portion of the Road Maintenance Fund (administered by MPWT) also
                          support post disaster relief and recovery. While the Disaster Management Law established the Disaster Management Fund
                          housed in the DSW of the MOLSW, it has only recently been capitalized with what can be considered almost negligible
                          amounts of financing. There is a significant gap between the disaster response needs and the public funding available
                          resulting in frequent diversion of limited public funds and heavy reliance on international donor assistance.
                          16.      Confronted with a tight fiscal space and at risk of frequent climate and natural disaster events, GoL has been
                          trying to develop additional buffers to finance disaster relief and recovery efforts. Given its high debt to GDP ratio the
                          GoL has very little room for maneuver in case of an exogenous shock. Recognizing the need for a comprehensive disaster
                          risk financing and insurance approach, the GoL has increasingly sought to supplement its own contingency budgets,
                          reserve funds, and available donor assistance with other means of financing a quick response to catastrophic events. The
                          details of this comprehensive risk management approach were documented most recently in the National Financial
                          Protection Strategy against Disaster Risks, launched by Lao PDR Ministry of Finance (MoF) in April 2023.
                          17.      Since February 2021, the GoL has obtained an insurance policy with the Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Insurance
                          Facility (SEADRIF), which was established with support from the World Bank as a regional platform to strengthen the
                          financial resilience of its member countries. With an insurance premium of US$ 5 million paid through an IDA credit as
                          part of the SEADRM project, the initial 3-year insurance policy provided protection of up to US$ 28 million. Following
                          moderate flood events in August 2022 and August 2023, total payouts during the initial policy period amounted to US$1.5
                          million. When the initial policy expired in February 2024, the GoL extended the insurance coverage using US$320,000 in
                          SEADRIF underwriting profits earned from the initial policy to provide protection of up to US$ 3 million for an additional
                          year. After the September 2024 floods from Typhoon Yagi, the full limit of the policy totaling US$ 3 million was paid out
                          to the GoL. In May 2025, the GoL renewed the SEADRIF insurance policy using US$ 3.6 million in trust fund grants with
                          contributions from the Governments of Japan, UK, and Germany to provide continued coverage for an additional two
                          years. The recent experience in execution of post-disaster funds has highlighted the need to increase coordination
                          between MOF and key agencies involved in disaster response to ensure effective and efficient use of insurance payouts.
                          Options are being explored to link post-disaster insurance payouts with the county’s ongoing efforts to strengthen
                          adaptive social protection systems (through the World Bank’s Reducing Rural Poverty and Malnutrition Project 2).



                                                                                                                                                   Page 6



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                            Relationship to CPF
                          18.      The SEADRM II is fully aligned with the actions on disaster risk, resilient infrastructure and supporting
                          vulnerable households of the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework for Lao PDR for the period FY2023–
                          FY2026. Specifically, flood risk management and early warning services activities under Components 1 and 2 support
                          resilience building objectives of the CPF pillars on “Improved labor income of vulnerable households” and “Sustainable
                          livelihoods through better management of natural resources,” while the disaster risk financing activities under Component
                          3 will support the CPF pillar on “Purchasing power and access to public services protected from macroeconomic instability
                          and fiscal pressure on social spending.” The proposed Project is also consistent with the recent Lao PDR Climate Country
                          Development Report (CCDR), which highlighted the need to improve flood prevention, expand nature-based solutions and
                          expand coverage of early warning systems as key priorities to support climate-resilient infrastructure and resilient, livable
                          cities. The CCDR also recommended expanding the use of market-based risk transfer solutions, such as SEADRIF insurance,
                          to strengthen the country’s financial resilience. The proposed project will also advance several of the GoL’s disaster risk
                          management goals laid out in several key policy and strategy documents described above such as the 9th NSEDP 2021–
                          2025, the NSDRR 2021-2030, the NFPSDR 2022-2030, and the Early Warning for All (EW4All) Roadmap 2024-2027. The
                          project will also contribute to the priority adaptation objectives set out the Lao PDR’s 2021 NDC and the National Strategy
                          on Climate Change (NSCC, 2023).




_For Official Use Only_
                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          19.      The project development objective is to “reduce the impacts of flooding in target areas and enhance the
                          Government’s capacity to provide hydro-meteorological services and disaster response.”

                            Key Results (From PCN)
                          20.    Progress towards the Project Development Objective (PDO) will be monitored by indicators, which could include:
                              a. People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (number, disaggregated by gender) WBG Corporate Scorecard
                                 indicator
                              b. People with reduced exposure to floods due to project investments (number, disaggregated by gender)
                              c. People covered by disaster risk finance and insurance (number, disaggregated by gender, youth), WBG
                                 Corporate Scorecard indicator
                              d. Private capital mobilized or enabled to reduce protection gap (number), WBG Corporate Scorecard indicator
                              e. Improved data and forecast products for effective early warning systems

                           D. Concept Description
                          21.     The proposed project builds on the achievements of the original SEADRM project and continues to support
                          implementation and scale-up of the activities initiated under it. It takes an integrated approach to disaster risk
                          management, supporting activities across the thematic areas of flood risk management (including nature-based solutions),
                          early warning systems and disaster risk finance. The below highlights (i) the achievements of the first SEADRM project; (ii)
                          the rationale for further investment across these three thematic areas, and (iii) the scale-up, complementarity and
                          difference for the proposed SEADRM II project. Detailed lessons learned from the ongoing SEADRM project can be found
                          in paragraph Error! Reference source not found..
                              a. Integrated Urban Flood Risk Management: The ongoing SEADRM project has provided improved flood protection
                              in the provinces of Oudomxay, Luang Prabang, and Bolikhamxay. With a total of US$33.5 million in investments, more
                              than 15km of riverbank protection infrastructure has been constructed (including embankments, flood gates and
                              channel improvements) to reduce flood impacts and protect almost 35,000 people and 8.5 square kilometers of land
                              across the three provinces. However, DOW’s Master Plan for Integrated Flood Management in Lao PDR called for

                                                                                                                                                   Page 7



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                             around US$1,100 million in flood protection investment needs across a total of twelve provinces. While investments
                             financed by the World Bank, the GoL and other development partners such as ADB and Korean EGCF have advanced
                             the agenda, a substantial portion of these needs are still to be financed. Recent findings from the Lao PDR CCDR
                             demonstrated that a targeted approach to riverine flood prevention by increasing defence levels for the highest
                             exposed areas would have a benefit to cost ratio of almost five in in terms of avoiding asset losses. The proposed
                             project would continue flood protection works in the highly exposed and strategically important provinces of
                             Oudomxay and Luang Prabang, scale-up to other identified at-risk provinces to be further prioritized, and expand to
                             the urban capital of Vientiane through urban drainage pilots. Incorporating lessons learned from the ongoing
                             engagement, the proposed project will further incorporate nature-based solutions in project designs and pilot
                             wetlands restoration activities.
                             b. Enhanced Hydro-Meteorological Services: The ongoing SEADRM project is on track to deliver strengthened
                             hydromet systems with the establishment of 70 new hydromet stations and the development of an integrated data
                             system for data collection and analysis. However, investment needs and even more importantly – significant capacity
                             building – is further required for the country to be able to fully exploit the recent hardware and software investments.
                             The recent Lao PDR CCDR estimated that the investment needs for improving the coverage and quality of early warning
                             systems in the country are relatively low when compared to the current costs of disaster response and recovery, with




_For Official Use Only_
                             US$82 million needed over the next ten years. Several donors and development partners (South Korea, the Climate
                             Risk and Early Warning Systems financing facility, Korea-KOICA, China, FAO, GEF, JICA, and the ABD) are financing
                             various physical investments identified in the needs assessment. The World Bank, often viewed as a knowledge leader
                             and convening authority in this space in Lao PDR, will therefore focus SEADRM II financing on improving capacity and
                             sustainability of the systems and supporting an integrated approach across development partners.
                             c. Strengthened Financial Resilience: The ongoing SEADRM project supported the GoL to establish a financial
                             protection framework to manage disaster risks and obtain a sovereign insurance policy with the Southeast Asia
                             Disaster Risk Insurance Facility (SEADRIF), securing a 3-year insurance coverage of up to US$28 million. SEADRIF
                             insurance policies secured between February 2021 and March 31, 2025 have helped the GoL reduce the funding gaps
                             caused by disasters at efficient cost. Since the inception of the first insurance policy in 2021, the GoL has made an
                             overall saving of US$7.6 million by opting for SEADRIF flood insurance instead of self-insuring through Government
                             budget. Without insurance, the GoL would have to cover loss through their own budget including funds set aside for
                             potential future damages and losses, which involves some opportunity cost for capital returns. Continued market
                             based, pre-arranged financing and technical assistance to further develop and expand the menu of risk retention
                             instruments is necessary for the country to be better able to respond to shocks, without diverting public finds to
                             address disaster response needs.
                          22.      The proposed project is structured around four components as described below, with tentative funding to be
                          confirmed during project preparation. Activities would be determined based on: (i) strategic alignment with national
                          development planning and DRM strategies; (ii) recommendations from technical assessments and diagnostics; (iii) funding
                          availability; and (iv) complementarity with other DRM programs and initiatives. The project design considers lessons
                          learned from SEADRM (see paragraph number Error! Reference source not found.) related to integrating hard and soft
                          solutions and the importance of nature-based solutions, government capacity, complexity and sustainability, and
                          stakeholder engagement and implementation modalities
                          Component 1: Integrated Urban Flood Risk Management (US$ 45 million)
                          23.      Implemented by DOW of MPWT, this component will strengthen flood protection and resilient urban planning in
                          several locations across Lao PDR. The component activities will be coordinated with DHUP of MPWT. Potential activities
                          include:


                                                                                                                                                 Page 8



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                              •   Sub-component 1.1 – Riverbank Protection and Flood Risk Management: (i) flood protection infrastructure such
                                  as riverbank protection embankments, canal improvements, water gates with pumping stations, river-side parks
                                  and tree-planting across Oudomxay, Luang Prabang, and other priority provinces to be further refined during
                                  project appraisal, (ii) feasibility studies and detailed technical designs, (iii) construction supervision and contract
                                  management and (iv) resettlement activities through assistance in financing for compensation and assistance to
                                  displaced person(s).
                              •   Sub-component 1.2 – Analytical Studies and Urban Resilience Pilot investments: technical and analytical studies
                                  to support integrated urban flood risk management in other priority areas such as Luang Namtha and Vientiane
                                  Capital City. It will also explore options to pilot priority drainage investments and wetland restoration activities in
                                  selected locations such as Vientiane Capital and Luang Prabang.
                              •   Subcomponent 1.3: Project Management: provision of assistance to strengthen the institutional, organizational,
                                  and technical capacity of MPWT to support implementation of Component 1 of the project, including
                                  coordination, technical matters, procurement, financial management (FM), social and environmental safeguards,
                                  monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and reporting.
                          Component 2: Strengthening Hazard Monitoring and Early Warning Systems (US$ 3 million)




_For Official Use Only_
                          24.     Implemented by DMH of MAE, this component will improve the delivery of weather, climate, and hydrological
                          services and end-to-end early warning systems throughout the country. To build upon previous investments under the
                          SEADRM project, potential activities under this component include:
                              •   Sub-component 2.1 – Upgrading Select Monitoring Systems and Communication Equipment: select monitoring
                                  stations and equipment that are deemed critical to the national network will undergo minor instrumentation
                                  upgrades (data loggers and sensors) to ensure functionality and integration of station data into the new hydromet
                                  data system being implemented by DMH.
                              •   Sub-component 2.2 – Early Warning Dissemination and Communication: (i) build capacity to deliver inclusive
                                  impact-based forecast and warning services and products tailored to the needs of diverse demographic groups,
                                  especially women and vulnerable communities; and (ii) training to communities to participate, understand and be
                                  active agents in preparing for and responding to early warning messages.
                              •   Sub-component 2.3 – Capacity Building and Project Management: The hardware investments and product
                                  development will be complemented with institutional and human capacity building, including but not limited to
                                  (i) technical, environmental and social management, and socio-economic assessments; (ii) consultation activities
                                  with communities and key stakeholders; and (iii) development of strategic, operational and workforce plans to
                                  improve sustainability of the monitoring system and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to support operation
                                  and maintenance of stations. Project management support for Component 2, including coordination, technical
                                  matters, procurement, FM, social and environmental safeguards, M&E, and reporting.
                          25.      Component 2 will be complemented with approximately US$0.9 million in BETF from the Climate Risk and Early
                          Warning Systems (CREWS). CREWS is a mechanism that provides financial support to Least Developed Countries (LDCs)
                          and Small Island Developing States (SIDS) to establish risk-informed early warning services. In Lao PDR the CREWS initiative
                          is led by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), with the World Bank and UNDRR as implementing partners. The
                          World Bank’s CREWS activities will focus on capacity building and institutional strengthening of provincial and district level
                          staff as well as community-based activities to support disaster preparedness and response. In the future, Component 2
                          may also be supplemented with approximately US$ 5 million in RETF additional financing from the Systematic
                          Observations Financing Facility (SOFF). The SOFF is a financing mechanism that supports countries to improve basic
                          weather and climate observations to accelerate the sustained collection and international exchange of essential data.
                          SOFF works with countries with the most severe shortfalls in observations, prioritizing the LDCs and SIDS.

                                                                                                                                                    Page 9



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                          Component 3: Financial Planning for Disaster Resilience (US$ 9 million)
                          26.     Under the SEADRM project, Lao PDR was able to access its first ever sovereign risk insurance policy. In February
                          2021, Lao PDR entered into a 3-year insurance policy with SEADRIF to provide financial protection of up to US$ 28 million
                          against floods and other disasters. This insurance has been renewed twice, first in September 2024 using the SEADRIF
                          Insurance Company’s underwriting profits earned from the first policy and for a second time in May 2025 through a
                          standalone RETF which extended the coverage until April 2027.
                          27.     Implemented by SOEI of MOF, this component will enable Lao PDR to access and utilize pre-arranged, market
                          based insurance and strengthen the Government’s capacity to meet post-disaster funding needs thereby enhancing the
                          country’s financial resilience to natural disasters.
                              •   Sub-component 3.1 – Payment of Disaster Risk Insurance Premium: facilitate continued access to pre-arranged,
                                  market-based financing through funding the cost of instruments up to project closure in the year 2031.
                              •   Sub-component 3.2 – Strengthening National Financial Resilience: (i) technical assistance and investments to
                                  support development and strengthening of pre-arranged operational systems linked to adaptive social protection,
                                  business continuity, agriculture and critical public infrastructures and services as well as capacity BUILDING ON
                                  Environment & Social and Financial Management that allows efficient and timely disbursement of disaster risk




_For Official Use Only_
                                  finance to the impacted population and businesses, (ii) facilitate the recipient’s engagement in regional disaster
                                  risk financing mechanisms, and (iii) day-to-day management and implementation of Component 3.
                          Component 4: Knowledge and Coordination (US$ 3 million)
                          28. Implemented by the Department of Planning (DOP) of MOF (formerly within the Ministry of Planning and Investment),
                              activities under this component will support (i) overall project management and coordination including monitoring
                              and evaluation and financial audits, (ii) development of tools and resources to strengthen the mainstreaming of DRM
                              in planning and investment, and (iii) day to day implementation of Component 4.
                          Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response Component (US$0 million)
                          29. This component is a ‘zero-assignation’ CERC that will provide funding for immediate response in the event of an
                              eligible crisis or emergency, defined as an event that has caused or is likely to imminently cause a major adverse
                              economic and/or social impact associated with natural or man-made crises or disasters.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
                          Legal Operational Policies
                                                Policies                                                     Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          Yes
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



                           Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



                          30.      Environmental and social risk is overall rated substantial. The risk classification under the World Bank’s
                          Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) is based on the initial screening of environmental and social risks and impacts
                          of the project as follows. Eight out of ten Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) of the WB ESF are currently considered


                                                                                                                                                 Page 10



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                          relevant to the proposed project. These are ESS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risk and
                          Impacts; ESS2: Labor and Working Conditions; ESS3: Resources Efficiency and Pollution Prevention, and Management;
                          ESS4: Community Health and Safety; ESS5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement; ESS6
                          Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources; ESS7: Indigenous People; ESS8:
                          Cultural Heritage, and ESS10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure.
                          31.      Environmental risks are rated as Substantial as the project will finance under Component 1 riverbank protection
                          and flood risk management in Oudomxay, Luang Prabang and other provinces to be identified. The risks are mainly
                          associated with construction activities and include Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risk of project personnel, traffic
                          accidents due to the transportation of construction materials and operation of project’s vehicles, physical and health
                          impact on public and local communities caused by pollution generated from construction activities, sedimentation and
                          erosion due to the site clearance, operation and management of quarry and borrow pit, other hazards due to the operation
                          of worker’s camp and maintenance of project equipment and machinery and health and safety of local communities who
                          live and work near the construction sites. However, the construction-related risk and impact are generally temporary,
                          localized, predictable, reversible and can be managed. An environmental impact assessment will be carried out
                          considering all relevant ESSs, and site-specific management plans will be prepared and implemented to ensure project
                          activities are fully compliant with ESF requirements.




_For Official Use Only_
                          32.     An OHS Management Plan will be prepared and implemented as part of the contractor’s ESMP (C-ESMP) to reduce
                          the OHS risks to all project personnel including civil servants and contractors engaged by the project. The OHS
                          Management Plan will cover issues such as worker compensation, first aid services, sanitation and hygiene at the
                          workplace, use of personal protective equipment, site safety, accidents and traffic management plan during construction,
                          and emergency management plans. The OHS plan will be reviewed and cleared by the supervision consultant who will
                          then continue to monitor the implementation at all construction sites. The contractors’ monthly reports to be submitted
                          to the Project Management Unit will include OHS activities and note any OHS issued that have taken place on site.
                          33.      Social risks are rated as Substantial. Social risk is currently considered substantial mainly due to potential risks and
                          impacts on the local communities and project workers associated with Component 1 to finance construction of flood
                          protection structures in the same and adjacent areas to the original project area in the target provinces (LPB, ODX). The
                          risks include resettlement and economic displacement in villages located along riverbanks where the work will be
                          undertaken, risks of occupational health and safety and community health and safety. There are two ethnic groups (Khmu
                          and Hmong) who meet the definition of Indigenous People under the WB’s ESS7 in Oudomxay province who could be
                          potentially affected by the project activities. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
                          and Ethnic Group Development Plan for ODX will be prepared for the project prior to appraisal.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank




                                                                                                                                                     Page 11



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                           Veronique Marie Morin Floissac
                           Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                           Hemang D. Karelia
                           Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                           Thu Hang Vu
                           Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao PDR)
                           Soulivath Souvannachoumkham
                           Director General, Public Debt Management Department
                           soulivath@gmail.com

                          Implementing Agencies




_For Official Use Only_
                           Department of Planning - Ministry of Planning and Investment
                           Oula Somchanmavong
                           Deputy Director General of Department of Planning
                           oula.somchanmavong@gmail.com

                           Department of State-Owned Enterprises and Insurance Supervision (SOEI) - Ministry of Finance
                           Somxay Keovandy
                           Deputy Director General, Department of State-Owned Enterprises and Insurance Supervision
                           somxay.keovandy@gmail.com

                           Department of Waterways - Ministry of Public Works and Transport
                           Phonephana Phrommala
                           Acting Director General, Department of Waterways
                           phonephanaph@gmail.com

                           Department of Meteorology and Hydrology - Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
                           Souksamone Pathammavong
                           Deputy Director General, DPF of MONRE
                           souksamone@gmail.com

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



                                                                                                                                 Page 12



                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II(P510690)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                Veronique Marie Morin Floissac, Hemang D. Karelia, Thu Hang Vu

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:           Yoonhee Kim                           02-Jun-2025

                          Country Director:                   Mariam J. Sherman                     20-Jun-2025




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                                      Page 13



                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
