Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Brazil: Arc Of Restoration Project (P510691)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                              Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                        (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 09/19/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05140




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 25, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Brazil: Arc Of Restoration Project (P510691)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510691                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       Restoration Arc              2026

                     Operation Name            Brazil: Arc of Restoration Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Brazil                    Brazil                                   LATIN AMERICA AND            Environment, Natural
                                                                                        CARIBBEAN                    Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                     Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Banco Nacional de         Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento        26-Nov-2025                  30-Jan-2026
                     Desenvolvimento           Econômico e Nacional - BNDES
                     Econômico e
                     Nacional - BNDES



Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     08-Sep-2025               488,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To expand access to finance for forest restoration in Brazil, with a focus on the Tocantins–Araguaia basin, improving
                     ecosystem services and creating sustainable economic opportunities.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     This operation will promote forest restoration in the Arc of Restoration in Brazil with a focus on the Tocantins-Araguaia
                     basin, a key transition area between the Cerrado and the Amazon located in the states of Pará, Tocantins, Maranhão
                     and Mato Grosso. The operation is the core of the NPC Brazil Investment Plan, which central objective is to promote
                     forest restoration in areas of the Tocantins-Araguaia Basin and consists in providing the concessional resources to the

                    Sep 25, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Brazil: Arc Of Restoration Project (P510691)



                     BNDES, which in turn will apply them into its credit lines related to forest restoration in the target territory. The direct
                     beneficiaries of the project are private companies in the forest restoration sector borrowing resources to finance their
                     respective business projects in the Brazilian restoration chain. Project financing will be mostly invested in the
                     restoration of areas characterized mainly by low-productivity pastures and agriculture in private rural properties. The
                     financing of private companies will contribute to mobilize large-scale capital and to strengthen the nascent forest
                     restoration industry. Investments in agroforestry systems and forest integration models, which incorporate high-value
                     crops, have become increasingly attractive for agricultural producers of various scales, encouraging the adoption of
                     sustainable practices that contribute to the recovery of degraded areas and increased agricultural productivity. In this
                     evolving landscape, the Project holds a huge potential for engaging small-scale farmers and traditional producers from
                     anchor companies and for strengthening local communities, making them more resilient to climate change, increasing
                     the provision of key eco-system services, generating global public goods. Furthermore, in order to contribute to a just
                     climate transition with gender equality and social inclusion – a core principle of the NPC-BR Investment Program – a
                     survey of data and information on the gaps and inequalities of gender, race and social inclusion in the intervention
                     region shall be carried out and subborrowers shall conduct meaningful consultations with local stakeholders at the time
                     of elaboration of forest restoration subprojects. Finally, it is worth to highlight that – as part of the NPC-BR Investment
                     Plan – project financed resources will be complemented by the supplemental Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM/NPC),
                     which will solely benefit Indigenous Peoples and traditional communities within the Tocantins-Araguaia basin.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Project targets 256 municipalities in the Arc of Deforestation – a zone of intense forest loss extending from western



Public Disclosure
                     Maranhão and southern Pará through Mato Grosso, Rondônia, and Acre states in North Brazil – that accumulate
                     191,633 hectares of deforested area.

                     The Arc of Deforestation comprises 266 municipalities that account for most Amazon forest loss. High rates of
                     deforestation led to environmental degradation, poverty, and social conflicts. Sixty percent of the municipalities in the
                     target area are in the Tocantins-Araguaia Basin. This basin covers approximately 918,822 km² or 11% of Brazil and
                     encompasses 453 municipalities, spanning six states. It is one of the largest river systems in South America and includes
                     two major Brazilian biomes – the Amazon and the Cerrado. It has also undergone significant environmental changes due
                     to large-scale agriculture, aquaculture, mining, and hydroelectric projects, which have altered land cover and hydrology
                     but have not improved social or economic indicators. Indeed, areas of high forest loss often correlate with low social
                     progress indices.

                     The target area was sparsely populated until the 1950s, with indigenous peoples, traditional communities, and
                     quilombolas inhabiting the area for centuries. Development and occupation occurred without adequately considering
                     their needs or traditional knowledge. The construction of major highways in the 1960s and 1970s, alongside public
                     policies and infrastructure projects, accelerated settlement and deforestation. Livestock farming and mineral extraction
                     have been key economic drivers, and the region has become a major agribusiness frontier.

                     The environmental liabilities of the target area include large areas of low-productivity pastures and agriculture that
                     require restoration. Despite this, it contains significant protected areas, including 35 indigenous lands, 10 quilombola
                     territories, and 23 conservation units.


                    Sep 25, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Brazil: Arc Of Restoration Project (P510691)




                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Bank will support BNDES to provide financing to eligible and clearly defined restoration subprojects proposed by
                     private agribusiness companies/large firms. BNDES is a public Brazilian development bank founded in 1952. in 2019,
                     BNDES worked directly with the IFC on technical assistance aimed at institutional strengthening, including strengthening
                     management and socio-environmental performance. BNDES has recently signed partnership and investment
                     agreements with other multilateral organizations (IDB, CAF and FONPLATA) and, and principally, prepared a large
                     operation with the Bank (Decarb. Energy-Intensive Value Chains - P507629). BNDES has in place an E&S Management
                     System (ESMS), which is in line with the National Monetary Council Resolution 4945/2021. This resolution provides for
                     the issuance of E&S and Climate Responsibility Policies by all financial intermediaries authorized to operate in the
                     country by the Brazilian Central Bank as well as for the actions aimed at the effective implementation of these policies.
                     This resolution also sets standards on and procedures for the management of environmental, social and climate-related
                     risks that must be taken by FIs when conceding financing to private/public borrowers.

                     This ESMS has been assessed by the Bank’s team as part of the above-mentioned operation and considered to be in line
                     with the requirements of ESS 9. A few additional complementary measures that have been agreed to with BNDES to
                     address the impacts of this E&S High risk operation (P507629). In addition, the recent Overview Assessment of the
                     Brazilian Environmental and Social Framework (BESF) shows the project will be conducted in a scenario of clearly
                     governance roles and thorough requirements for licensing subprojects.

                     BNDES will establish a PMU that will receive support from BNDES E&S and Climate directorates for managing the E&S




Public Disclosure
                     risks of the Project.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Moderate
                     The environmental risk of the project is moderate. Overall, environmental positive impacts are expected as a result of
                     the project activities. Forest and ecological restoration projects bring multiple environmental benefits, such as
                     improved air and water quality, improvements in water regulation services, reduced soil erosion, carbon removal and
                     capture, and biodiversity conservation. However, they can have negative impacts resulting from risks associated with
                     inadequate introduction of exotic or unsuitable species, increase in the amount of biomass raising the risks and
                     intensity of wildfires in early stages of vegetation growth, greater demand for water affecting local water availability,
                     potential use of pesticides requiring integrated pest/control management (IPM or IVM) approaches, and limited
                     waste and wastewater generation. There are no civil works envisaged under the project. Although the Amazon and
                     Cerrado biomes include a vast amount of environmental protected areas, conservation units, and internationally
                     recognized as high biodiversity value area (KBA), interventions will target the generation of positive environmental
                     outcomes, aligned with their conservation purposes, and will most likely be located in already modified habitats, such
                     as pastures and degraded lands. Their potential environmental risks and impacts are not likely to be significant and do
                     not have a high potential for harming the environment, nor are envisaged to result in the conversion of natural
                     habitats. The environmental risks and impacts are expected to be predictable, temporary and/or reversible; low in


                    Sep 25, 2025                                                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Brazil: Arc Of Restoration Project (P510691)



                     magnitude and site-specific; of low probability of serious adverse effects to the environment and able to be mitigated
                     in a predictable manner, with well-known control and mitigation measures.
                                                                                                                                     Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Project will support the implementation of the NPC Brazil Investment Plan (NPC-BR), which focuses on forest
                     restoration in the Tocantins-Araguaia Basin within the Arc of Deforestation and aims to strengthen local communities,
                     enhance resilience to climate change, and ensure a just transition in one of Brazil’s most critical socio-economic
                     regions. Restoration projects are often associated with multiple social benefits, but they ordinarily raise concerns
                     about reduced opportunities and potential exclusion of local communities and vulnerable social groups given the high
                     financial costs, restrictions on access to natural resources, and conflicts with traditional activities that can lead to
                     disputes over land and water use. In this project, such risks are expected to be of moderate likelyhood and small
                     magnitude given the fact that investments in agroforestry/forest restoration will be channeled through large private
                     agribusiness firms and focused on recovering degraded lands within privately owned farms. As such, subprojects will
                     neither require land acquisition, nor adversely affect lands occupied by Indigenous Peoples/traditional communities.
                     On the contrary, subprojects are expected to reduce the adverse impacts caused by agricultural expansion on natural
                     resources available within these lands and traditional livelihoods. The project may also benefit smallholders as
                     seedling production has significant potential for job creation and income generation, especially for women and local
                     communities. Nevertheless, NPC-BR recognized and set as criteria that beneficiary large firms will need a) further
                     engagement with local communities and vulnerable social groups to be successful in their restoration investments, b)
                     foster their. participation in restoration activities, and c) ensure the most vulnerable share benefits in a culturally
                     adequate manner.




Public Disclosure
                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      BNDES has an ESMS in place with clear procedures to: a) screen/categorize subprojects per their potential E&S
                      risks/impacts; b) screen subprojects against a exclusion list which considers the type of financing instrument, type of
                      subproject, economic sector, geographical area, and borrower’s track record; c) monitor implementation and E&S
                      performance per the nature and magnitude of E&S risks; and d) ensure the subproject is implemented to meet
                      national law and contractual requirements. The risk classification system covers 3 categories reflecting the potential
                      to cause: highly relevant adverse E&S risks/impacts or involving investments in critical activity sectors or sensitive
                      locations that generally require more complex E&S studies (Cat. A); or adverse E&S risks/impacts of medium
                      relevance (B); or minimal or non-existent relevant adverse E&S risks/impacts (C). High & Substantial-risk subprojects
                      (per Bank criteria) will be included in a project-specific exclusion list.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      The NPC-BR Investment Plan was developed through consultations involving government agencies, civil society,
                      private sector, and representatives of indigenous peoples/traditional communities, which helped to define the
                      Project’s baseline scenario, strategy, final target area, and goals. There is recognition of the need for further and
                      deeper engagement of sub-borrowers with local communities during project implementation, ensuring participation

                    Sep 25, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Brazil: Arc Of Restoration Project (P510691)



                      of women and vulnerable groups in restoration activities. Guidelines will be developed during preparation and
                      incorported in the Project ESCP to ensure the adoption of culturally adequate engagement procedures. The Project
                      will rely on the external communication channels, the grievance mechanism and the set of rules that sub-borrowers
                      must comply with for periodic disclosure of information related to their subprojects, carrying out of consultations
                      with surrounding communities, registering and responding to complaints that BNDES has in place.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant

                      The core functions of the Project will be carried out by workers directly contracted by BNDES, by its sub-borrowers
                      and primary supply workers. BNDES has in place adequate labor management and OHS procedures. Furthermore, as
                      per the list of “Activities, projects and items not supported by the BNDES”, financial support is not granted to sub-
                      borrowers convicted – either in the administrative or judicial sphere – for child labor and slave labor. BNDES ESMS
                      also requires verification that sub-borrowers have in place a) procedures to promote the health and safety of
                      workers, including the prevention of the occurrence and severity of occupational accidents and b) a permanent and
                      accessible grievance mechanism to receive complaints from employees and outsourced workers. During prepatation,
                      the Bank will further discuss with BNDES how labor standards will be enforced across subprojects, with especial
                      attention to rural areas challenges (informal labor), and potential use of community workers.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The Project will finance forest restoration in the Arc of Restoration and financed activities
                      may include native vegetation recovery, enrichment planting, agroforestry systems, riparian restoration, among




Public Disclosure
                      others. Pollution risks and environmental impacts are expected to be limited, small-scale, restricted to the projects’
                      footprint and include limited waste and effluent generation, and soil carryover. Risks associated with pesticides
                      management, requiring IPM or IVM will be further assessed during preparation. Nevertheless, BNDES ESMS has
                      specific provisions/restrictions for financing activities involving the use of agrochemicals and pesticides. GHG
                      emissions are expected to be reduced as a direct outcome of the project. Water availability is not an issue in the
                      targeted region and, in light of the project’s design, water availability is indeed expected to be enhanced in the
                      benefited areas and ecosystems, in the long run.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      The Project is expected to have a positive impact on ecosystem services and community health and safety. It will not
                      induce significant influx of labor, nor expose communities to hazardous materials, emergency events or increased
                      exposure to communicable and non-communicable diseases. BNDES screens subprojects considering potential
                      increase of risks to community health and safety (exposure to odors, to excessive lighting, to significant noise or dust
                      and to disease vectors or increased risk of disease spread; risks of fires and explosions; movement or storage of toxic
                      materials that may generate contamination of the environment; use of machinery and equipment that can lead to
                      accidents; increased risk of traffic accidents; transport of hazardous or unhealthy materials that can lead to accidents;
                      use of armed security) as well as location in areas at high-risk of floodings, landslides, forest fires, water scarcity and
                      extreme temperatures and the mitigation measures in place.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                     Not Currently Relevant




                    Sep 25, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Brazil: Arc Of Restoration Project (P510691)



                      This standard is currently not relevant. Subprojects are not expected to cause permanent or temporary physical and
                      economic displacement resulting from the acquisition or impose involuntary restrictions on land use rights through a)
                      expropriation or other compulsory procedures in accordance with national law, b) negotiated settlements with
                      property owners or those with legal rights to the land, if failure to reach settlement would have resulted in
                      expropriation or other compulsory procedures or c) voluntary land transactions that may result in the displacement
                      of persons, other than the seller, who occupy, use or claim rights to the land in question. The ESMS that BNDES has in
                      place checks on these aspects and will screen out subprojects requiring involuntary land acquisition or land use
                      restrictions.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                       Relevant
                      Resources

                      The forest restoration envisaged under the project may include native vegetation recovery, enrichment planting,
                      agroforestry systems, riparian restoration, among others. By design, the project will not cause adverse impacts to
                      biodiversity, nor generate conversion of natural forests/habitats. It will, in fact, target modified/degraded habitats for
                      restoration and conservation initiatives, and retrieval of their ecological functions. Impacts on biodiversity/natural
                      resources will be largely positive and focused on conservation/sustainable management. Positive outcomes will
                      include improvements in water regulation services, biodiversity protection and overall ecological gains. The use of
                      invasive alien species will not be allowed. Disturbances of local fauna may occur, however unlikely. During
                      preparation, BNDES ESMS procedures will be assessed to check if they are sufficient to manage the risks of the
                      project, and ensure the achievement of outcomes materially consistent with the ESS6.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                  Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The NPC-BR has identified that 35 Indigenous Lands (ILs) are located within the Project’s geographic target area.
                      Given its restoration objetives and focus on lands privately owned by large private firms, subprojects are not
                      expected to interfere with ILs or to have adverse impacts on Indigenous Peoples (IPs) and other culturally distinct
                      social groups. They will neither cause relocation, nor have significant impacts on the cultural heritage of these social
                      groups. On the contrary, they may contribute to reducing pressures these groups face due to agricultural expansion
                      and deforestation. Furthermore, the Brazilian law requires that IPs are consulted whenever projects interfere with
                      the buffer zone of their lands and the ESMS that BNDES has in place checks whether subprojects that are located
                      nearby these areas have assessed the impacts on local communities, conducted consultations with them in a
                      culturally appropriate manner, and developed Mitigation Plans in a participatory manner.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                            Relevant

                      Project activities are not expected to interfere with or have adverse impacts on tangible or intangible cultural
                      heritage which may be recognized and valued at a local, regional, national or global level. Its activities are not
                      expected to be located within (or in the vicinity or buffer zone of) a legally protected cultural heritage area, including
                      archaeological sites, built heritage and natural features with cultural significance. Its activities are neither specifically
                      designed to support the conservation, management and use of cultural heritage, nor expected to involve excavations,
                      demolition, movement of earth, flooding or other changes in the physical environment. Furthermore, the ESMS that
                      BNDES has in place checks whether subprojects are located in or nearby these sites and whether they involve such


                    Sep 25, 2025                                                                                                          Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Brazil: Arc Of Restoration Project (P510691)



                      type of works. Finally, Brazilian cultural heritage legal and institutional framework is in line with the requirements of
                      ESS8.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                  Relevant

                      BNDES (the selected FI) has in place an ESMS that includes all the key elements required under ESS 9: • E&S policy
                      endorsed by its senior management, which was revised in 2024. • Organizational structure with clearly defined roles
                      and responsibilities for senior management and technical units in charge of overall accountability for E&S
                      performance and ESMS implementation. • Clearly defined E&S procedures for managing E&S and climate-related
                      risks and impacts of financed subprojects in a manner proportionate to their likelyhood and magnitude. • A list of
                      exclusions rendering ineligible for financing activities, economic sectors, and borrowers. • Appropriate labor
                      management procedures – including a grievance mechanism – that are conducive to a safe and healthy working
                      environment. • External communications channels. • Grievance mechanism. This ESMS will be reassessed during
                      project preparation and any gaps will be addressed (in the ESCP) to ensure consistency with the ESF.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                              No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                       No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features



Public Disclosure
                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           In Part
                       The Brazilian legal and institutional framework ruling environmental licensing processes and the E&S and climate
                       responsibilities of financial intermediaries is comprehensive, robust, and well-enforced. E&S and climate risks and
                       impacts of subprojects must be assessed by FI prior to grant financing (CMN Res. 4943/21).

                       BNDES ESMS screens subprojects in terms of compliance with national laws, and specific E&S risk criteria.

                       During preparation, the Bank’s team will reassess BNDES ESMS in light of the Project’s scope and interventions.
                       Building up on the assessment carried out for the E&S high-risk P507629, the task team aims to further understand
                       E&S requirements for the types of interventions of the current Project applied by BNDES and whether the use of BESF
                       (in part/in whole) enables the Project to achieve objectives materially consistent with the ESSs.

                       Additional measures that may be required to ensure consistency with the ESF (if any) will be incorporated in the ESCP.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                     No
                       Not applicable.




                    Sep 25, 2025                                                                                                        Page 8 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Brazil: Arc Of Restoration Project (P510691)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The due diligence of the Bank is ongoing and will be completed by Appraisal. This due diligence will particularly build
                     from the Bank’s due diligence carried out in the context of the Brazil Decarbonization of Energy-intensive Value Chains
                     Project - P507629, which determined that BNDES system is well aligned with the application of ESS 9.

                     The key objective of the current process is to further understand how BNDES E&S requirements are applied to the types
                     of interventions envisaged under the current project. Its results will be properly reflected in the Appraisal ESRS,
                     including potential gaps between the application of the national legislation, BNDES ESMS, and the ESF.

                     The task team will conduct the assessment of the existing BNDES ESMS in light of the anticipated project’s scope (i.e.,
                     native vegetation recovery, enrichment planting, agroforestry systems, and riparian restoration). Based on this
                     assessment, an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), including all measures considered necessary to
                     bridge eventual gaps, will be agreed upon with BNDES and publicly disclosed. BNDES will also authorize – in writing –
                     the Bank to disclose on the Bank’s website, a summary of the elements of its ESMS.




                     III. CONTACT POINT




Public Disclosure
                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Arthur Amorim Braganca                   Title:         Senior Economist

                      Email:                 aamorimbraganca@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange              Job Title:     Senior Environmental Specialist

                      Email:                 blange@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Faruk Miguel Liriano                     Job Title:     Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                 fmiguelliriano@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Sep 25, 2025                                                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Brazil: Arc Of Restoration Project (P510691)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                Arthur Amorim Braganca, Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange, Faruk Miguel Liriano

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:       Guilherme Todt Cardoso De Faro

                     ADM Social Specialist:              Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa




Public Disclosure




                    Sep 25, 2025                                                                                              Page 10 of 10
