Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Parana Water Security Project(P510227)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Sep-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01267




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Parana Water Security Project(P510227)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)        Operation ID                 Operation Name
Brazil                          P510227                      Parana Water Security Project
Region                          Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date         Practice Area (Lead)
LATIN AMERICA AND               17-Nov-2025                  25-May-2026                     Water
CARIBBEAN
Financing Instrument            Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project              State of Parana              State Secretariat of
Financing (IPF)                                              Planning - SEPL

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Strengthen the Borrower's capacity to (a) collaboratively manage water security risks in a changing climate and to (b)
reduce those risks in selected areas of the Borrower's territory by implementing integrated, cross-sectoral
interventions.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                              263.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                   263.00
               of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                186.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                186.00
  Non-World Bank Group Financing


                                                                                                                       Page 1



                                                                                                             Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Parana Water Security Project(P510227)


      Counterpart Funding                                                                                                                   67.00
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                                                 67.00
      Commercial Financing                                                                                                                  10.00
         Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                                                  10.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                  Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                   The review did authorize the preparation to continue



 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1.       Parana, situated in the Southern region of Brazil, has experienced robust economic growth over the past
decades. In 2024, Parana represented 2.3 percent of Brazil’s territory, 5.6 percent of its population, and 6.1 percent of its
gross domestic product (GDP). Over the last 10 years, the state’s economy grew at an average rate of 1.62 percent per
year in real terms, outpacing the national average. Parana has become Brazil’s fourth largest state economy and fifth
largest exporter, primarily due to its dynamic agribusiness1 which accounts for 30-35 percent of the state’s GDP2, nearly
80 percent of its exports3 and employs about 40 per cent of its labor force4. Today, Parana is Brazil’s leading producer of
animal proteins5 (first in chicken and fish, second in pork, eggs and milk) and the second largest producer of grains (second
in soybean, corn, and wheat). It is Brazil’s third largest exporter of agribusiness products.

2.       Sustained economic growth has generated jobs and incomes and induced solid improvements in living
conditions. The state is home to 11.8 million inhabitants, 89 percent of whom live in urban areas, with 30 percent residing
in Curitiba metropolitan area (RMC), the state capital. The rural population of 1.3 million people has been declining over
time. Total population is expected to peak in 2043 at approximately 12.5 million. Economic prosperity has led to job
creation, increased per capita income, reduced inequalities and poverty as well as improved Human Development Index
(HDI). Today, among Brazil's 27 states, Parana is a top performer in employment rate (it ranked 4th at 3.3 percent of




1 In the past 20 years, the production and trade of grains and animal proteins in Parana have soared along with related sectors such as transport and

logistics, agricultural inputs and machinery production, the food industry, and marketing and trade services
2 Instituto Paranaense de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social, 2020.
3 Agencia Estadual de Noticias, 2022.
4 REVISTA PARANAENSE DE DESENVOLVIMENTO, Curitiba, v.42, n.140, p.89-106, jan./jun. 2021. “A Dimensão do Agronegócio Paranaense: uma

análise inter-regional de insumo-produto”. It estimates that the agribusiness in Parana accounted for 37 percent of employments in 2015 (of which
50 percent in agroservices), against 27 percent in Brazil as a whole.
5 Parana state produced 3.65 billion liters of milk in 2023, 2.2 billion of birds in 2024, and 12.4 million of pigs in 2024.



                                                                                                                                                Page 2



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Parana Water Security Project(P510227)


unemployment rate last trimester of 20246 or full employment), per capita income (5th at R$2,438 in 20247), poverty rate
(5th at 17.3 percent in 20238), HDI (7th at 0.769 in 20219) and Gini coefficient (4th at 0.463 in 2023)10.

3.       Parana state development strategy encourages agro-industrialization and exports combined with sustainable
food production. The strategy builds on the state’s vocation for food production and strives to strengthen the enabling
environment to attract private investments to foster innovation, add value to production through transformation and
conquer new markets within and outside Brazil. From a regional perspective, the strategy aims to generate jobs and
improve living conditions. With over R$300 billion private investment in agribusiness since 2019, the state reached its
lowest unemployment rate in history in 202411. On the global stage, Paraná is positioning itself to assume an ever-greater
role in guaranteeing the planet's food security. Finally, the strategy emphasizes the need to accelerate the transition to
environmentally conscious and resilient farming models to ensure the long-term sustainability of Parana’s development
model and rich biodiversity.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context
Sectoral context
4.       Climate change risks and vulnerability. Climate change in the State of Parana (the Project area) has been
increasing the frequency and intensity of droughts and, to a lesser extent floods, the former being a relatively new issue,
and structural water deficit, a few months a year, particularly in the north-west (NW) of the state12 and the Metropolitan
area. Climate change has also increased the intensity of rainfall events, increasing soil erosion in rural and peri-urban
areas, particularly in the NW of the State where soils are fragile. Those have resulted in heavy losses in agricultural
production, reduction in hydropower generation (due to water deficits and accelerated reservoir sedimentation),
disruptions in water supply sanitation services affecting not only human health and wellbeing, but also the industrial and
services sectors that depend on them. For instance, during the 2021/2022 drought, precipitation dropped to 50 per cent,
inducing losses in agricultural production of R$ 31 billion (about 25 per cent of agriculture GDP); and rationing of water
supply services in the metropolitan area during 649 days. In 2023, torrential rains and floods affected 500,000 people with
damages estimated at R$ 2.1 billion. More generally over the past 15 years, more than 5,000 hydro-meteorologic extreme
events have affected people and the economy. Climate change projections indicate that droughts, seasonal water
shortages, intensive rainfall events and floods will further intensify, with the greatest impacts of droughts and seasonal
water shortages expected in the northwest, southwest, north regions and RMC, and the greatest impacts of floods in the
northwest and RMC13. The proposed Project intends to manage those climate change risks by increasing the state capacity
to address water security14 risks statewide and reducing those risks in selected areas.

5.    The fast-growing agribusiness sector and continued urbanization in Parana have brought significant socio-
economic benefits over the past decades. However, these advancements, coupled with climate change, have


6 Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), 2025. Data from the last trimester of 2024. National average was 6.2 percent. The number of

unemployed in Parana was 206,000 people.
7 IBGE, 2024. Continuous National Household Sample Survey - Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios Contínua (PNAD).
8 IBGE,2024. Poverty rate @664 Rs @ 2023 value. Elaborated by Instituto Jones do Santos Neves from PNAD, IBGE, 2023.
9 IBGE, 2022. Indice de desenvolvimento Humano.
10 IBGE, 2024. PNAD.
11 IBGE, 2024. 3.3 per cent, last trimester of 2024.
12 State Water Resources Plan, 2010.
13 Climate analysis and determination of the vulnerability of municipalities in Paraná in the face of climate change; State Climate Action Plan 2024-

2050.
14 Water security risks in this project are defined by droughts, water shortages, floods, runoff-caused erosion.



                                                                                                                                                Page 3



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Parana Water Security Project(P510227)


heightened water insecurity15, posing risks to the sustained socio-economic development of the state and causing
conflicts. These risks have been acknowledged in recent state development strategy/plan and sectoral policies16. The
proposed Parana Water Security Project is part of the government's response to address these risks, with emphasis on
the agriculture and potable water sectors, which are key to the state socio-economic development, are particularly
vulnerable to those risks and contribute to them.

6.       The agriculture sector is highly vulnerable to water security risks. The principal water security risks confronting
agriculture stem from climate change, localized competition over water use from growing urban centers and industries,
and maladaptive practices within the sector, especially where the soils are fragile in the NW region. More specifically,
these risks include: (i) increased structural crop water deficits during the dry season, particularly in the NW due to climate
change and land degradation; (ii) heightened production losses caused by intensifying droughts and floods attributable to
climate change and land degradation; (iii) rapid irrigation expansion that may lead to water overexploitation and conflicts
and ultimately unsustainable irrigation practices, if planning, information, practices and control are not improved; and (v)
water pollution from urban, industrial, and agricultural sources potentially affecting animal health (specifically
aquaculture) and crop commercialization.

7.       The agriculture sector is also partly responsible for increased water insecurity. Decades of rapid growth and
intensification17 in agricultural production, particularly in grains and animal proteins, alongside the recent surge in
irrigation to counteract climate change effects and enhance productivity, have collectively heightened water security risks
for all. More specifically, agriculture contributes to water security risks through increased pollutant loads from
agrochemicals and animal waste, increased water withdrawals for irrigation and animal use, and land degradation
exacerbating both water deficits and contamination. Parana ranked third in the use of agrochemicals, which has risen 57
per cent over the past decade to 139,000 tons by 2024. The state's increasing animal production generates significant
animal waste. While irrigation concerns only 3 per cent of the cultivated land (170,000 ha), it is expanding quickly (+65 per
cent in 10 years) and represents the largest water withdrawal, mainly during dry periods when resources are scarce. This
growth has already led to conflicts and is likely to continue. Widespread soil degradation from agriculture, especially in
the NW, reduces resilience to droughts, heightens flood risks, and increases water pollution in runoff.

8.       Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) services are vulnerable to climate change-exacerbated water security risks.
Parana is on track to reach universal access18 to safe WSS in urban areas, with currently 100 per cent access rate for water
supply and 80 per cent for sanitation (all wastewater collected is treated). However, urban areas face water security risks
at the water source due to increased water demand and pollution, all of which are exacerbated by climate change. It is
estimated that 37 per cent of urban centers face deficits to meet future water demand. Since most of the population lives
in urban areas, and state urbanization will continue, it is critical to increase the resilience of urban WSS systems to water
security risks. In rural areas, access to basic WSS is not universal, but the exact situation is unclear. The State is conducting
a diagnostic to better understand the situation. The degradation of water resources represents a higher risk in rural areas
considering that most rural water supply (RWS) systems do not monitor water quality and do not treat water. Moreover,
the resilience of RWS to water shortages, contamination and flood events is usually lower in rural areas, as they often
depend on a single water source.

15 In this project, water security risks include risks related to droughts, floods, water shortages and water contamination.
16 Parana State Water Resources Plan- Plano Estadual de Recursos Hídricos do Parana (2010) highlights water security risks per hydrographic region,

including droughts, floods, soil erosion and sedimentation, water scarcity, water contamination, water conflicts and the exacerbating climate effects
on those risks; Desenvolvimento Paraneanse: context, tendencias e desafios (IPARDES, 2023).
17 The main use of land in the state is agriculture (agropecuária) with 13.74 million ha (65 percent of the land cover), the second is forest with 5.28

million ha (both native and commercial). Both have been relatively stable over the past 30 years, meaning that the increase in agricultural production
have come primarily from increases in land productivity.
18 The federal universal access law set targets at 99 per cent access rate for water and 90 per cent for sanitation by 2033.



                                                                                                                                                  Page 4



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Parana Water Security Project(P510227)



9.       Urban and industrial areas are also contributing to water insecurity in parts of the state, particularly in the RMC
and other rapidly urbanizing areas. While most urban wastewater/solid waste in the state are treated or safely disposed
(84 per cent of urban population have access to sewage collection and treatment and 98 per cent benefit from solid waste
collection services)19, there are still households, particularly in informal settlements, and industries that discharge
untreated wastewater/solid waste unsafely, ending-up polluting water bodies. Moreover, urban drainage systems are not
always properly designed to handle increasingly intense rainfall events, causing some flooding and significant erosion at
the drainage outlet in peri-urban areas, resulting in significant land degradation, damage to infrastructure, water
contamination and siltation of riverbeds and reservoirs. Erosion issues are particularly problematic in areas of fragile soil
structure in the NW. They add up to the erosion, siltation and diffuse contamination caused by agriculture.


Institutional context
10.      Water Resources Management (WRM). The 1999 State Water Law20 establishes the State Water Resources Policy
with the objective to ensure that water resources are managed in an integrated and sustainable manner to guarantee
water of adequate quantity and quality for current and future generations, as well as the prevention and protection
against critical hydrological events. The Policy defines six instruments21 to achieve these goals and creates the State’s
Water Resource Management System (Sistema Estadual de Gerenciamento de Recursos Hídricos, SEGRH), composed of
five institutions22, which is the organizational framework governing WRM in the state. Among those institutions, the
Institute Water and Land (Instituto Agua e Terra, IAT) is the State executive agency for WRM, and one of the Project’s
implementation agencies. Despite the progress made, SEGRH still faces significant challenges related to institutional
capacity, integration among agents, the implementation of management instruments23, and social participation. The
strengthening/modernization of the SEGRH and policy instruments is considered pivotal to improve water security and
will be supported by the proposed Project.
11.      Agriculture and water security. The Secretariat for Agriculture and Supply (Secretaria da Agricultura e do
Abastecimento, SEAB), plays a central role in planning, organizing, and executing agricultural activities at State’s level.
SEAB is responsible for defining and implementing state policies and programs for water security in agriculture. Affiliated
with SEAB, the Rural Development Institute of Paraná (Instituto de Desenvolvimento Rural do Paraná, IDR) provides
integrated services in agricultural research, extension, and rural development, with a focus on expanding agroecological
practices, including water security. The Agricultural Defense Agency of Paraná (Agência de Defesa Agropecuária do
Paraná, ADAPAR), also linked to SEAB, is an autonomous entity tasked with promoting animal and plant health, food
safety, and the sustainable use of agricultural soils and chemicals. Both IDR and ADAPAR need to be strengthened in order

19   National System of Information on Basic Sanitation (Sistema Nacional de Informações em Saneamento Básico).
https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=eyJrIjoiNDU1ZmM4ZjYtNTU0YS00YjFkLWE5NzYtMjNkZThjYjg3YzVmIiwidCI6IjFmMWJlODA0LWViZGYtNDJmNC1iZ
GExLTdmMjlhYmU2ZDQ3YSJ9&pageName=344bbd2d217999c8e747
20 State Water Law Nº 12,726 of 1999.
21 The State Basin Water Resources Plan; the River Basin Water Resources Plans; the Ambient water quality standards; the water resources use right;

the water resources use fees; the State Water Information system and the State Water Resources Fund.
22 SEGRH is composed of five institutions: the executive central body, the Water and Land Institute; the Central Coordinating Body, the State

Secretariat for Sustainable Development (Secretaria do Desenvolvimento Sustentável); the central deliberative and regulatory body, the State Water
Resources Council (CERH/PR); the regional deliberative and regulatory bodies, the Water Basin Committees and the technical and administrative
support units for the Water Basin Committees – IAT’s Hydrographic Basin Management Units.
23 30 per cent of water users are illegal; groundwater monitoring is incipient; surface water monitoring and modelling in small watersheds is

insufficient for water right allocation; water quality monitoring and modelling need to be strengthened in coverage, frequency and parameters
measures; hydrological and hydrogeological studies are required to better know water availability, the effects of climate change and interaction
between surface and groundwater; some modules of the water information system and decision-support tool need to be implemented/modernized;
water resources use fees are still incipient, needing to be extending to more basin and to agriculture use.

                                                                                                                                              Page 5



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Parana Water Security Project(P510227)


to fulfill their mandate related to water security.
12.      In June 2024, Law No. 21,994 establishes the State Program for Water Security in Agriculture. This law aims to
incentivize preservation, conservation, and production practices among rural producers, with the goal of increasing water
availability and quality, prioritizing family agriculture. The law sets out objectives such as reducing conflicts over water
use, mitigating scarcity during deficit periods, and protecting natural resources. It establishes subsidies for individual and
collective beneficiaries. The law also mandates the rational use of water and irrigation, protection of springs, and
emergency assistance to farmers affected by climatic events. The State Water Security in Agriculture Law provides a
comprehensive system for promoting water security in Paraná’s agricultural sector, integrating institutional collaboration,
incentives, and technical support, on which the proposed Project would build, while ensuring compatibility and integration
with the water security for other sectors.
13.      Water supply and sanitation. Parana Water and Sanitation Company (Companhia de água e saneamento do
Paraná, SANEPAR), a state-owned company responsible for water and sanitation services in urban areas, serves 344 out
of the 399 municipalities in the State. The remaining are served by Autonomous Municipal Water and Sanitation Services
(Serviços Autônomos Municipais de Água e Esgoto). In rural areas, service provision lies with the municipalities, many of
which face considerable challenges due to limited institutional, financial and technical capacity. To address these gaps,
SANEPAR and IAT, through their respective programs (Sanepar Rural and Agua no campo) have partnered with
municipalities to provide initial support through the development of RWS systems and some technical assistance to the
entity later in charge of their operation and maintenance (O&M). After construction, those systems are transferred to the
municipalities for their O&M, or, more commonly, to the rural communities. These self-supplied communities present
several challenges related to ensuring long-term sustainability. Water safety is compromised due to inadequate
chlorination and systematic water monitoring; operational reliability is hindered by limited access to replacement
equipment and a lack of trained personnel. Moreover, financial constraints are a major obstacle to continued delivery.
When present, rural sanitation solutions are mostly on site, for single households who take care of their maintenance.
14.      The legal framework for basic sanitation is defined by Federal Law No. 14.026/2020, which establishes ambitious
targets for universal access by 203324. In alignment with this national policy, the state of Paraná enacted Complementary
Law No. 237/2021, which created three microregions for WSS service provision: Oeste, Centro-Leste, and Centro-Litoral.
These microregions are structured as intergovernmental autarchies with deliberative and normative powers. Coordination
is managed by the secretariat housed within the State Secretariat for Cities (Secretaria das Cidades, SECID).


 Relationship to CPF
15.     The proposed operation is consistent with the priorities of the World Bank Group’s 2024 Brazil Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY24-FY28 (Report No. CPF0000013BR). The Project contributes to High Level Outcome
(HLO) 2: Greater inclusion of the poor and underserved populations, in line with Objective 2.1: Improve access to essential
services and products, which emphasizes overcoming gaps in access to basic services. The Project will play a key role in
helping to close the urban-rural gap through the development of a RWSS policy and plan for universal and sustainable
access and the implementation of collective rural supply systems. The Project is also aligned with HLO 3: A greener
economy with reduced vulnerability to climate shocks, especially through its Objective 3.1: Improve management of
natural resources as it promotes the sustainable management of water, soil and on-farm forest.
16.       The Project is also fully aligned with the three main objectives of the World Bank Group Water Strategy [FY25-
30]25. It contributes to the objective of Scaling up and speeding up universal access to WSS in rural areas. It advances the

24 Universal access is considered to be reached when 99 per cent of the population have access to potable water and 90 percent to basic sanitation,

including treatment.
25 Building a Water Secure Future: World Bank Group Water Strategy [FY25-30]



                                                                                                                                              Page 6



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Parana Water Security Project(P510227)


objective of Enhancing food production and smallholder farmers’ livelihoods through enhancing soil and water
conservations practices and investments in sustainable irrigations systems to enhance climate resilience. Finally, it
advances the objective of Reducing water-related risks by namely droughts, water deficits and contamination and to a
lesser extent floods.
17.     Alignment with Government objectives. In addition to supporting the current administration program, the
proposed Project is aligned with the Federal26 and State Water Policy27, including the implementation of the Federal-State
Water Security Pact28 (Pacto nacional pela gestão das águas); the Federal WSS policy29 and the Federal Agricultura Policy30,
and the Federal31 and State Climate policy32, the State Agricultural Soil Prevention Law33 and the State Agriculture Water
Security Law34.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


 18.     Strengthen the Borrower's capacity to (a) collaboratively manage water security risks in a changing climate and
 to (b) reduce those risks in selected areas of the Borrower's territory by implementing integrated, cross-sectoral
 interventions.


 Key Results (From PCN)

 19.       Achievement of the Project’s results will be measured through the following PDO-level indicators:
 •     Collaborative, integrated, cross-sectoral State Water Resources Plans, Basin plans and water security plans for
       urban water sources developed and under implementation
 •     Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to water security/climate risks35 (People, of which women)
 •     Land area under enhanced management for water security (Ha)36
 •     RWSS policy and plan for universal access adopted
 •     Increased access to water supply and sanitation in rural areas, of which safely managed (people, of which women)



 D. Concept Description



26 National Water Policy, Law N. º 9.433/1997.
27 State Water Resource Policy, State Law N. º 12.726/1999.
28  Aims to strengthen institutional cooperation for improved water resource management, sanitation regulation, and dam safety policy
implementation.
29 Brazil’s Federal Basic Sanitation Policy, Law No. 11.445, 2007 updated in 2020, by Law No. 14.026.
30 National Agricultura Policy, Law N.º 8.171, 1991.
31 National Policy on Climate Change, Law N.º 12.187, 2009.
32 State Policy on Climate Change, State Law N.º 17.133, 2012.
33 State Law N.º 8.014, 1984.
34 State Law N.º 21.994, 2024.
35 This includes urban people with decreased risks of WSS systems interruption due to water sources issues (contamination, turbidity, water deficit);

farmers with increased resilience to water deficit/drought risks and people with reduced flood risks.
36 This includes the agricultural land with improved soil & water management practices & degraded land/wetlands/forest covers that were restored

and protected.

                                                                                                                                                Page 7



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Parana Water Security Project(P510227)



  1. Description

20.     The proposed Project will put in place the foundation for long-term water security under a changing climate in
the State of Parana while at the same time addressing pressing water security risks in priority areas. To do so, the Project
will adopt an integrated, multisectoral approach focusing on three interrelated topics: (a) the sustainable management of
water resources, which is the foundation of water security for people, the economy and biodiversity as water is a shared
and finite resource; (b) the water security for agriculture production, the main driver of Parana’s economy, and, at the
same time, the reduction of agriculture contribution to water security risks and (c) the water security for potable water
supply to support the universalization goal, while reducing WSS contributions to water security risks. The two priority
areas are the NW region of the state and the Alto Iguaçu watershed which have been selected due to their pressing water
security risks. The NW region has the driest climate, soils prone to erosion and with low water storage capacity. This is the
area where the agriculture production suffers the most in times of drought, where many urban water sources are at risk
from contamination and deficits and where water erosion in rural and peri-urban areas is the most acute. The second area
is the Alto Iguaçu watershed where the RMC is located, which is water stressed due to high water demand and
contaminant loads from the Metropolitan area. Water security challenges have been intensifying in both areas due to
climate change.
21.     The proposed Project is a US$263 million Investment Project Financing (IPF) operation, financed by a US$186
million IBRD loan and US$77 million in State counterpart funds with a six-year implementation. The State of Parana
selected the IPF instrument as it wishes a close supervision from the PMU in the secretary of planning and the World Bank
(WB) during the implementation of Project’s activities. It requested a six-year implementation period considering the time
necessary to obtain concrete results on the ground, to follow a multi-sectorial and participatory approach, and to put in
place the mechanisms to ensure sustainability of results after the project closes.

To achieve its PDO, the Project is designed around three integrated components:
22.       Component 1 – Strengthen climate-informed WRM. By promoting a better integrated, participatory, resilient and
data-driven water resources governance and infrastructure, the component contributes to reducing pressures on water
resources quantity and quality and supports more effective preparedness and responses to increasing climate change
risks. In doing so, it lays the institutional and technical foundations for improving water security for multiple uses across
the state, with a stronger focus in priority areas where they are implemented in an integrated manner with activities from
the other components.
23.       Subcomponent 1.1 – Modernize water monitoring, information and management instruments. This
subcomponent aims to strengthen the State’s operational and technical capacity to manage its water resources through
enhanced monitoring, information and decision-support systems, as well as regulation and enforcement. Activities
include: (i) hydrometeorological and groundwater observation networks densification and modernization; (ii) water
resources strategic studies, including on climate change impacts; (iii) water quality laboratories enhancement; (iv) water
information and decision-support systems modernization; (v) State’s Water Resources Plan and basin plans preparation;
(vi) water rights regularization and enforcement campaigns in priority areas; (vii) water use fees definition at basin level;
(viii) dam safety monitoring expanded in priority areas. Collectively, these activities will improve the availability and
reliability of water data and strengthen the State’s ability to allocate, regulate, and protect water resources more
effectively in the context of increasing water demand, contamination and climate change.
24.    Subcomponent 1.2 – Improve integrated water resources governance. This subcomponent enhances water
resources governance by strengthening policy integration, institutional capacity and participatory mechanisms. It will
support: (a) the establishment of an integrated management platform under the State Planning Secretariat (Secretaria do
Planejamento, SEPL) to align key state programs and policies that affect or depend on water resources, identifying


                                                                                                                         Page 8



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Parana Water Security Project(P510227)


necessary trade-offs and (b) strengthen the SEGRH through: (i) the development and implementation of an action plan to
strengthen the performance of SEGRH and its constituents (IAT, CERH, Basin committees) in the implementation of their
core functions; (ii) the formulation and implementation of a water users communication plan/awareness building
campaign to foster the deployment and compliance with the water management instruments and (iii) specific support to
the adoption of the water use and discharge fees which are key to the financing of WRM functions.
25.     Subcomponent 1.3 – Develop green and grey infrastructure to reduce urban erosion and flooding. This
subcomponent includes the integration of nature-based and traditional grey infrastructure to implement climate-resilient
and effective solutions to address soil erosion37 in peri-urban areas and localized urban flooding due to inadequate urban
drainage and intensifying rainfall events. Specific activities include the control of erosive processes through the
improvement of drainage systems, including their outlet, energy dissipators and the restoration of degraded soil.

26.     Component 2 – Strengthen agriculture water security and reduce water security risks caused by agriculture. This
component is designed to enhance water security for agricultural production amid rising water shortages and land
degradation exacerbated by climate change. It also seeks to mitigate the risks of water contamination and overexploitation
associated with rapid irrigation development, increased agrochemical usage, and greater animal waste generation.
27.     Subcomponent 2.1. – Strengthen the State capacity to manage water security risks in agriculture. This
subcomponent includes applied research program; the development of water for agriculture monitoring, information and
decision-support system; staff training and logistics.
28.     Subcomponent 2.2. – Increase family farming water security in areas affected by climate change-exacerbated
water deficit and soil degradation. Supported activities include communication and capacity building; extension services
and financial incentives to promote sustainable soil and water management practices; construction and rehabilitation of
water intakes, excavated water tanks and irrigation systems.
29.     Subcomponent 2.3. – Decrease agriculture contribution to water security risks in selected urban water sources
and their watersheds. Supported activities include: (i) participatory diagnostic and action plans to identify and address
water security risks in each priority basin; (ii) action plan implementation, monitoring and evaluation through: extension
services, financial incentives for restauration and protection of water sources, riparian vegetation and “legal reserve”,
promotion of sustainable soil and water management practices, farm-level basic sanitation and animal waste treatment;
sustainable production practices and certification; PES; control and enforcement of pesticide and soil management,
erosion-proof rural roads upgrading, partnerships with cooperatives and farmers associations to scale-up and accelerate
impacts.
30.     Both subcomponents 2.2 and 2.3 are supported by activities under 1.1, which aim to enhance understanding of
water resources availability, plan the use of water resources, monitor water resources and usage, regularize water rights,
and strengthen their control and enforcement efforts; as well as subcomponent 3.2.b&c.
31.     Component 3 - Improve water security for universal WSS access and reduce climate change-exacerbated water
security risks caused by WSS. This component aims to enhance the climate resilience, quality, and availability of water
and sanitation services by addressing both infrastructure and management model gaps in rural areas, in support of the
universalization goals, and to reduce water security risks related to urban water sources in priority areas.
32.    Subcomponent 3.1 – Increase access to sustainable rural water and sanitation services. This subcomponent aims
to advance the universalization of water and sanitation services in rural areas, improving their climate resilience and
ensuring their long-term sustainability. Activities to be financed include: (a) the development of a RWSS sanitation policy

37 In addition to decrease risks of peri-urban infrastructure damages, this activity will reduce sediment and pollutant loads into water bodies that

contribute to water quality degradation and reservoirs siltation.

                                                                                                                                               Page 9



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Parana Water Security Project(P510227)


for universal and sustainable access, based on a thorough diagnostic of the current situation to identify gaps and
investment needs, and accompanied by a detailed implementation strategy that give special attention to management
and financial models for the sustainability of services; (b) the implementation and rehabilitation of collective RWS systems
and associated sanitation solutions. O&M plans will be prepared to strengthen the long-term performance and
sustainability of the systems, with technical assistance and training to ensure local ownership and capacity.
33.     Subcomponent 3.2 – Reduce water security risks in selected urban water sources and their watersheds. This
subcomponent supports the implementation of SANEPAR’s Water Security Plan (Plano de Seguridad da Água, PSA)38,
focusing on activities to manage risks at the level of the water sources that face growing water demand and pollution and
heightened vulnerability from climate change. It complements subcomponent 2.3 that supports improvements in farming
practices and technologies to reduce water pollution and deficit risks caused by the agriculture sector, as well as
Component 1.1 and 1.2 which aim at improving the sustainable management of the water resources through
strengthening the implementation of the State Water Law’s governance and policy framework.
34.       Specific activities to be financed under this subcomponent include:
      a. Supporting the implementation of the Iguaçu Water Reserve Project (Projeto Reservas Hídrica de Iguaçu) through
         the creation and management of six wetlands in the river flood plain to reduce pollution in the Alto Iguaçu River39
         and the construction of a 6.3 km “clean” water canal downstream of SANEPAR reservoirs up to the current water
         intake, by-passing a contaminated section of the Iguaçu River.
      b. Improving the quantitative and qualitative monitoring of key urban water sources.
      c. In conjunction with IDR-SEAB’s subcomponent 2.3, elaborate studies, plans, methodologies and instruments to
         reduce pressures on urban water sources and their watershed, with an emphasis on turbidity and non-point
         source pollution that impact the quality of water withdrawals, the effectiveness of water treatment and the
         continuity of water services.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                           Policies                                                                 Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                            Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                                       No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

38 The PSA is a preventive management process, based on the concept of multiple barriers, good practices and processes of analysis of threats and

risks, critical control points, applied to water supply systems from the source (surface or groundwater) to the client. It is conformed with World
Health Organization and Brazilian Regulatory Standard 17080.
39 SANEPAR’s Iguaçu Water Reserves Project aims at creating a biological corridor of approximately 600 km in the Alto Iguaçu basin—a watershed

that supplies around 60 per cent of Curitiba's drinking water. The project consists of implementing inter-connected wetlands in former sand and clay
mining excavation pits to filter diffuse pollution to improve water resources quality and increase the basin’s natural water storage capacity. Two
types of wetlands are considered: “wetlands for dilution”, which are located in sections of the rivers that are highly polluted, receiving treated
wastewater discharge as well as various non-point source pollutions and “wetlands for water supply reserve” that have potential to serve as a water
reserve to be used in times of droughts or in case contamination of existing water sources were to occur. These interventions will strengthen water
security as it supports the requalification of the Iguaçu River from its source to the municipality of Porto Amazonas, enabling new potential sources,
and providing an extra water reserve of two billion liters, equivalent to supplying one million people for 72 hours.

                                                                                                                                                Page 10



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Parana Water Security Project(P510227)




35.      The Project’s environmental risk is rated Moderate, as anticipated impacts are largely site specific, predictable,
temporary and/or reversible, and can be managed with standard measures and good international industry practice. Key
risks include construction related soil erosion and sedimentation; temporary air/noise and waste/effluent management
issues; and operational risks such as altered aquatic habitats and ecological flows from intakes, over abstraction and
competition for water (including irrigation), pollution from agrochemicals and wastewater, and localized loss of native
vegetation. Cumulative pressures on water quantity/quality and habitat connectivity are possible across multiple basins,
and climate variability (more intense droughts and heavy rainfall) heighten water security challenges, especially in the
Northwest and Alto Iguaçu areas. Sensitive receptors include aquatic ecosystems, riparian vegetation and wetlands, and
patches of native Atlantic Forest within a broader mosaic of human modified rural landscapes. At the same time, the
Project is expected to generate positive environmental outcomes by improving water quality and availability through
integrated watershed management and nature-based solutions; reducing erosion and pollution via sustainable
agriculture, efficient irrigation, and enhanced rural water and sanitation; restoring riparian/native vegetation and
supporting biodiversity; and strengthening climate resilience with adaptation and mitigation co benefits.
36.      The Project will apply ESS1–ESS8 and ESS10, and OP 7.50 on International Waterways is applicable given activities
in tributaries of the Rio de la Plata Basin (and potentially the Guarani aquifer). The mitigation approach follows the
mitigation hierarchy—avoiding sensitive areas where feasible, enforcing ecological flows, employing nature based
solutions and low impact irrigation, and implementing robust pollution prevention, OHS, community health and safety
(including dam safety), and biodiversity measures—underpinned by an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (with subproject ESIAs/ESMPs as required), an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan with monitoring
and reporting, Brazil’s three stage environmental licensing, and complementary instruments to ensure comprehensive
risk management.
37.      The social risk of the Project is rated substantial provisionally until more information is on Project activities are
available because some activities could potentially increase existing vulnerability or tensions over resources use. However,
the Project does not involve activities that a) have a high potential for harming people and cause adverse impacts on
Indigenous Peoples and other vulnerable social groups, or b) cause adverse impacts on a large number of people or
geographical area, which are permanent and irreversible and cannot be avoided, reverted or mitigated through well-
known, routine and proven measures in a predictable manner. Land acquisition needs are not expected to be large in
numbers and potential adverse impacts related to physical and economic displacement will be addressed through the
implementation of Resettlement and Livelihood Restoration Plans following the requirements of ESS 5. The exposure of
local communities to health, safety and security risks and impacts is anticipated to be minor because project activities are
not expected to induce the influx of large number of workers or increase traffic and road safety risks. They are not
expected to rely on large dams or small dams that could cause safety risks, or to expose communities to water-borne,
water-based, water-related and vector-borne diseases, communicable and noncommunicable diseases as project
activities will contribute to improving sanitation conditions in rural areas. Furthermore, communities will be neither
exposed to hazardous materials, nor to security personnel untrained in the use of force and appropriate conduct toward
residents.
38.     Finally, the Project is expected to have a positive impact on ecosystem services as it will induce changes towards
more sustainable agricultural practices. The large number and diversity of stakeholders involved with the Project and
potential disputes over water use can be mitigated through a robust stakeholder engagement strategy already
incorporated in Project design – to which the Borrower has proven capacity, commitment and track record – that will be
strengthened through the development of the Project’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan in a manner consistent with the
requirements of ESS 10 and ESS 7. The Project is also designed to prioritize disadvantaged and vulnerable social groups


                                                                                                                         Page 11



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Parana Water Security Project(P510227)


with its interventions, reducing the potential risk of elite capture of its benefits.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Marie-Laure Lajaunie
   Lead Water Resources Management Specialist

   Irene Natalia Wasilevsky
   Senior Agriculture Economist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  State of Parana

 Implementing Agencies
  State Secretariat of Planning - SEPL

  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
 APPROVAL


 Task Team Leader(s):                         Marie-Laure Lajaunie, Irene Natalia Wasilevsky

 Approved By

 Practice Manager/Manager:                    David Michaud                             28-Aug-2025

 Country Director:                            Cecile Fruman                             24-Sep-2025




                                                                                                             Page 12



                                                                                                      Official Use Only
