Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Cote d'Ivoire Productive Investment and Jobs DPF1(P510901)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Dec-2025 | Report No: PIDIC00251




Public Disclosure Authorized
      The World Bank
      Cote d'Ivoire Productive Investment and Jobs DPF1(P510901)


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
 BASIC INFORMATION


 A. Basic Project Data

 Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                               Cote d'Ivoire Private Investment and Productive Jobs
 Cote d'Ivoire                  P510901
                                                               DPF1
 Region                         Estimated Approval Date        Financing Instrument
 WESTERN AND CENTRAL                                           Development Policy
                                16-Apr-2026
 AFRICA                                                        Financing (DPF)
 Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
 Republic of Cote d’Ivoire      Ministry of Finance and
                                Budget

Proposed Development Objective(s)
 Scale-up private investment and job creation by: (i) unlocking high-impact sectors for productive jobs, (ii)
 strengthening the business environment, and (iii) deepening human capital and skills

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
 Financing (US$, Millions)


 Maximizing Finance for Development

 Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
 Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               Yes

 SUMMARY
   Total Financing                                                                                              400.00

 DETAILS
   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                             400.00
     World Bank Lending                                                                                         400.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue



                                                                                                                      Page 1
       The World Bank
       Cote d'Ivoire Productive Investment and Jobs DPF1(P510901)




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

To accelerate poverty reduction and reach upper-middle income status, Cote d’Ivoire (CIV) will need to rely more heavily
than in the past on the private sector to invest and create productive jobs. While CIV has achieved notable development
gains over the past decade, its growth potential and capacity to create more and better jobs remain constrained by persistent
barriers to private investment and formalization, low productivity in agriculture and other sectors, large disparities in access to
basic infrastructure and services, and insufficient skills and human capital to stimulate structural transformation. The lack of
productive job opportunities is particularly challenging for a rapidly growing youth population, as annual job creation should
accelerate from an average of 430,000 over the last five years to about 600,000 in the next five years to absorb newcomers on
the labor market.
Côte d’Ivoire’s macroeconomic policy framework is deemed adequate. Revenue-based fiscal consolidation efforts supported
by the IMF program and World Bank operations are putting the country on track to meet the WAEMU fiscal deficit ceiling of 3
percent of GDP from 2025 onwards, while terms-of-trade gains have helped narrow the current account deficit. The latest Debt
Sustainability Analysis (DSA) confirmed that overall and external debt distress risks remain moderate in CIV, while SDFP PPA
reforms have strengthened debt management and key rating agencies have recently upgraded debt outlooks. However, short-
term debt refinancing pressures are significant, calling for continued fiscal consolidation and reform efforts.

 Relationship to CPF

The proposed operation embodies the One World Bank Group approach to maximizing impacts on development objectives.
The operation is fully aligned with the FY23–27 CPF priorities of boosting competitiveness, inclusion, and resilience, as well as
the new 3-by-5-by-7 World Bank Jobs Framework, which aims to unlock the potential of key sectors for jobs (agribusiness,
infrastructure, healthcare, tourism, and manufacturing), combined with economy-wide reforms to create a more conducive
environment for business investment and job creation. The operation builds on the One-WBG approach to maximize impacts,
with upstream coordination with IFC and MIGA on the program design and complementary operations to support reform
implementation and results delivery. It is also strongly aligned with key corporate priorities such as the M300 agenda on energy
access and Agriconnect to boost food security, job creation, and productivity in agriculture.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
The development objectives of the proposed operation are to scale-up productive investment and job creation by: (i) unlocking
high-impact sectors for productive jobs, (ii) strengthening the business environment, (iii) and deepening human capital and
skills.
 Key Results

Expected results of the reform program include increased energy production from renewable sources, better cost-recovery for
the public energy utility, wider and more affordable access to broadband internet, increased land title registration in urban
areas, more inward FDIs, more business registrations, higher tax revenues, more effective tax incentives, higher employment
rates for TVET students, more trained healthcare professionals, greater access to private healthcare services, broader access to
water and sanitation, and ultimately greater mobilization of private capital and job creation. Efforts to mobilize domestic
revenues, limit contingent liability risks from loss-making SOEs, and strengthening the role of the private sector in public service
delivery will also help restore fiscal space and reduce public debt. Finally, the proposed operation is expected to be aligned with
the goals of the Paris Agreement, advancing both adaptation through stronger land tenure security, climate-smart agriculture,
rural electrification, and digital services, and mitigation through improved land management, reforestation in agroforests, and
expanded renewable energy.


                                                                                                                               Page 2
       The World Bank
       Cote d'Ivoire Productive Investment and Jobs DPF1(P510901)



 D. Concept Description

The Program, which consists of a series of three single-tranche operations, seeks to stimulate private investment and create
more productive jobs in Cote d‘Ivoire. The program is structured around three pillars:
Pillar #1 – Unlocking high-impact sectors for productive jobs. This pillar focuses on reforms aimed at: (i) mobilizing additional
private sector investment in renewable energy and restoring the financial and operational viability of the public energy utility;
(ii) further enhancing competition and inclusiveness in the broadband market; and (iii) modernizing the research and extension
service ecosystem in the agriculture sector and improving the supervision and formalization of agroforest producers.
Pillar #2 – Strengthening the business environment. The second pillar focuses on reforms aimed at: (i) strengthening
institutional and regulatory frameworks to improve land registration, resettlement and compensation procedures; (ii) creating
a single autonomous Economic Development Board (EDB) to attract domestic and foreign investment, lower barriers to
formalization, and improve the business environment; and (iii) aligning the tax system with international standards to
strengthen legal certainty, boost investor confidence, and support revenue mobilization.
Pillar #3 – Deepening human capital and skills. The third pillar focuses on reforms aimed at: (i) boosting the supply of adequately
skilled workers for the labor market by introducing a phased accreditation system for TVET institutions; (ii) improving healthcare
service capacity and boosting private sector engagement; and (iii) improving water service quality and restoring the financial
viability of the water sector utility.

 E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

 Poverty and Social Impacts

Reforms supported by the proposed operation consist mainly of legal and regulatory measures and are expected to have
limited direct short-term effects on poverty, with benefits materializing over the medium term. The reform program seeks to
address structural constraints that disproportionately affect poor and vulnerable groups such as insufficient job opportunities,
uneven and unreliable energy access, limited digital connectivity, weak agricultural productivity, and barriers to skills
development and access to water and sanitation. These benefits and risks will be further analyzed during preparation of the
project appraisal document. Indicative reforms for the second and third operation in this new programmatic series could include
reforms with more direct implications for household welfare, such as water and electricity tariff optimizations, which would
help improve service sustainability and access, but could pose affordability risks for poor and vulnerable households if not
properly calibrated and supported by adequate mitigation mechanisms.

 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

Regulatory and institutional reforms supported by this program have limited direct impacts on the environment. Positive
effects from the reform program of this first operation are expected from the promotion of renewable energy sources, climate-
smart agriculture practices, and sustainable resource management, while moderate indirect risks could arise from land-use
changes, infrastructure expansion, or resource-intensive investments. These are mitigated through mandatory Environmental
and Social Assessments for downstream investments and by promoting sustainable sectoral practices. CIV’s environmental
management system, led by the Ministry of Environment (MINEDDTE) and implemented by National Environment Agency
(ANDE), remains broadly adequate. ANDE validates environmental screening, approves ESIAs, reviews forest and renewable
energy plans, and mandates audits for higher-risk projects. Public consultations are systematic, and although ANDE faces staffing
constraints, World Bank support is helping strengthen capacity and professionalize oversight.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT



                                                                                                                              Page 3
     The World Bank
     Cote d'Ivoire Productive Investment and Jobs DPF1(P510901)


World Bank
 Marc Stocker
 Senior Economist

 Djedje Hermann Yohou
 Economist

 Alberto Portugal
 Senior Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Republic of Cote d’Ivoire

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Finance and Budget

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Marc Stocker, Djedje Hermann Yohou, Alberto Portugal

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Hans Anand Beck                       08-Dec-2025

Country Director:                      Marie-Chantal Uwanyiligira            24-Dec-2025




                                                                                              Page 4
