Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project(P510120)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Aug-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01340




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project(P510120)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
Burundi, Congo,                P510120                     Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project
Democratic Republic of,
Rwanda
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN           19-Sep-2025                 04-Dec-2025                   Energy & Extractives
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Finance,        Ruzizi 3 Energy Limited
Financing (IPF)                Ministry of Finance and
                               Economic Planning,
                               Ministry of Finance

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to increase the supply of clean hydropower electricity to Burundi, Democratic
Republic of Congo, and Rwanda by leveraging private capital.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                       925.00

  Total Financing                                                                                            925.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               260.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00

DETAILS
Private Sector Investors/Shareholders



                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                          Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project(P510120)


 Equity                                        Amount       Debt                                        Amount

    Government Contribution                         42.00     IFI Debt                                         783.00

         Other Donors                               42.00          IDA                                         260.00

    Non-Government Contribution                    100.00          IFC A Loan                                   50.00

         Private sector Equity                     100.00          Other IFIs - Concessional Terms             393.00

                                                                   Other IFIs - Commercial Terms                80.00

 Total                                             142.00                                                      783.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                 Concept Review Decision
High                                                         The review did authorize the preparation to continue




                                                                                                                    Page 2



                                                                                                         Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project(P510120)


 B. Introduction and Context

 Sectoral and Institutional Context

 1.     Burundi, DRC1 and Rwanda have shared interconnected electricity networks since the 1950s. These
 networks serve a densely populated region and approximately 18 million people within the existing three-
 country interconnected area2. Some of the large metropolitan areas include Kigali with around 1.2 million
 inhabitants, Bujumbura with around 1.1 million and Goma with around 900,000 inhabitants. Since only around
 25 percent of the population within the grid area is connected, there is an enormous scope for demand growth
 and development, particularly when adequate power supply will be available to serve the loads.

 2.       The three countries established a regional organization EGL based in Bujumbura in 1974, to ensure
 cooperation on regional energy planning and design and monitoring of regional energy projects. One of EGL’s
 initiatives has been the development of hydropower generation potential of the Ruzizi river, which flows out
 of Lake Kivu3 and forms the border among Burundi, DRC and Rwanda on its way south to Lake Tanganyika4.

 3.      The Ruzizi River has roughly 500 MW of viable hydropower potential, of which 74MW have already
 been developed with two existing hydropower plants. The 29.8 MW Ruzizi 1 HPP, operational since 1959, is
 owned and operated by DRC’s national utility, the National Electricity Company (Société Nationale d’Electricité
 - SNEL). The 43.8 MW Ruzizi 2 HPP, operational since 1989, is owned and operated by the International
 Electricity Association of the Great Lake Countries (Société Internationale d'Electricité des pays des Grands
 Lacs - SINELAC), a commercial company jointly owned by Burundi, DRC and Rwanda. The output of the HPPs
 has since degraded by around 20 percent, mainly due to the lack of available funding to carry out the required
 maintenance and rehabilitation. An estimated US$30 million is needed to complete the rehabilitation of the
 two power plants.




1 The Eastern DRC city of Goma and surrounding areas have been provided with grid-based power since the 1950s from the existing Ruzizi 1 HPP and

subsequently from Ruzizi 2 HPP. This grid is not connected to the rest of DRC, and hence “Eastern DRC” will generally be used in this document to
describe the region of DRC that will benefit from the Ruzizi 3 project.
2 The total population of Burundi, Rwanda and North and South Kivu in Eastern DRC is close to 40 million people and growing at approximately 3

percent per annum.
3 Lake Kivu forms the border between DRC and Rwanda.
4 Lake Tanganyika is shared between Burundi, DRC, Tanzania and Zambia.



                                                                                                                                            Page 3



                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project(P510120)


 Relationship to CPF

 4.      By ensuring additional hydropower supply to Burundi, DRC and Rwanda through a PPP arrangement,
 the project is well aligned with the strategic context in each participating country as well as with the World
 Bank’s (WB) regional programs and strategies aimed at increasing sustainable power supply and improving
 access to electricity through regional cooperation and private sector mobilization.

 5.       The operation is aligned with the World Bank Gender Strategy, by integrating targeted interventions
 to reduce gender gaps in the electricity sector through (i) increasing the supply of modern and reliable
 electricity with impact on household connections and opportunities to develop productive uses of electricity
 and (ii) creating more and better jobs, by integrating activities to increase women’s participation and training
 in the workforce in the sector.

 6.      The operation is also aligned with the World Bank Group’s Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD)
 which entails leveraging the private sector in ways that optimize the use of scarce public resources. This
 operation leverages the World Bank’s previous and ongoing support to policy reforms in the three member
 states to improve the sector’s financial and operational performance and reduce its dependence on public
 funding, enhance transparency, and build credibility with investors.




 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


 7.   The Project Development Objective is to increase the supply of clean hydropower electricity to
 Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda and Burundi by leveraging private capital.


     Key Results (From PCN)

8.        PDO level indicators:

      ▪   Generation capacity of renewable energy constructed or rehabilitated [megawatt]
      ▪   Private capital mobilized for power generation [US$]
      ▪   Net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (CRI) [metric tons/year]


9.       The primary project beneficiaries will be the households and other utility customers of Burundi, DRC and
Rwanda who will be supplied with a more reliable, clean and affordable electricity service. The project will also
facilitate increased access to electricity by ensuring sufficient power generation to expand reliable access. With


                                                                                                               Page 4



                                                                                                       Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project(P510120)


average generation of 1,168 GWh per year and based on average household consumption patterns, the project
will produce the electricity required for the equivalent of 7 million persons in the sub-region.

 D. Concept Description
10.    The project rationale is to provide clean and affordable hydropower generation that will result in
improved reliability of services and enhanced electricity access for households and other utility customers in
the heavily populated Great Lakes region of Burundi, DRC and Rwanda, a region that currently has low access
to electricity. The project is included as part of least cost generation sources in the latest electricity masterplans
in Burundi and Rwanda, and as a key resource for the development of electricity of Goma and its surrounding
area in Eastern DRC. As a regional project with equity participation of the three countries, it will enhance
regional cooperation and integration. As a PPP, it will mobilize US$100 million of private capital, and project
development and implementation will benefit from highly capable private sponsors and operators.

11.     The Ruzizi 3 HPP will have an installed generation capacity of 206 MW. The Ruzizi River forms a natural
border between Burundi, DRC and Rwanda, flowing southwards from Lake Kivu into Lake Tanganyika. Ruzizi 3
will be located downstream of the existing Ruzizi 1 (29.2 MW) and Ruzizi 2 (43.8 MW) HPPs, commissioned
respectively in 1958 and 1989. Ruzizi 1 HPP is located 3 km downstream of the outlet of Lake Kivu and controls
the discharge from Lake Kivu. A fourth hydropower scheme, Ruzizi 4, is also planned in the future.

12.     The project will include two World Bank-funded components as follows: Component 1: Contributions
to the construction costs of Ruzizi 3 HPP (US$190 million), and Component 2: Advisory support to EGL, member
States and public utility companies (US$5 million).

13.      Component 1 will contribute to the financing of the main construction contract that will cover the
following items: (i) the access roads; (ii) the 45 meter high embankment dam, the spillway and the bottom
outlets; (iii) the power intake, the eco-flow bypass and associated hydro unit; (iv) the 4,000 meter long lined
headrace tunnel; (iv) the penstocks and surface powerhouse with three turbine-generator units; (vi) the 30 kV
site transmission lines, switchyard and 7.1 km 200 kV transmission lines to Kamanyola substation; and (vii) the
employer’s village. These will be included in the scope of a single turnkey Engineer-Procure-Construct (EPC)
contract combined with a FIDIC Emerald book contract5 for underground works. Component 2 will comprise
technical assistance and capacity building to the regional body EGL, its member States, and the public utility
companies in order to strengthen their participation in the development of the project. It will also include
advisory and analytical work to strengthen the member State’s institutional, legal, and regulatory framework to
facilitate the trade and dispatch of electricity between the public utility companies6. As part of construction,
natural and climate risks will be included in the engineering design. Examples of resilience measures include,
among others: provision of appropriate anchorage support, deep foundation and size of footings to adapt
against extreme wind and flooding, elevated control room and critical equipment to reduce flood hazard


5 FIDIC (Fédération Internationale Des Ingénieurs-Conseils) is the International Federation of Consulting Engineers who prepare template contracts

that gather best international practices in terms of construction and supply contracts. The Emerald book has recently been issued by FIDIC in order
to support contracts with significant underground works.
6 It is so far planned that each country will receive one third of the electricity produced. Flexibility to allow adjustments depending on ad-hoc demand

and offtake capacity is also under consideration as previously envisaged within Rusumo project.

                                                                                                                                                   Page 5



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project(P510120)


potential, use of steel, concrete or composite towers, creation of vegetation buffers and regular vegetation
management.

14.     The project’s theory of change (ToC) is predicated on the financing of project activities that will result in
the construction of a 206 MW hydropower generation facility that will feed associated transmission lines and
substations. The project will result in increased energy generation capacity that will enable the three countries
to expand electricity access but also to improve the quality and quantity of the service provided. As a
competitive and renewable energy, the project will also enable to lower the cost of energy generation as well
as reduce the carbon footprint of the sector. The former will also contribute to improve the financial
sustainability of the three utilities. The provision of technical assistance to the regional body EGL, its member
States, and the public utility companies will also contribute to the finalization of the development until financial
close, while empowering them in the discussions with private sponsors. This should in fine support finalization
of a balanced and fair deal and partnership, enhance the bankability of the project and support private capital
mobilization. In a longer term, the technical assistance will also build the capacity of the three countries in
managing and developing such PPP project.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                                 Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                     Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




15.      The Project presents significant E&S risks, both rated as high. The environmental risks stem from the
complex financing structure involving multiple lenders with varying standards, necessitating harmonization to
avoid compliance issues. The project's scale, including the construction of a large dam and transmission lines,
will alter landscapes and ecosystems. Key environmental risks include seismic and landslide threats, dam safety
concerns, habitat loss, river flow changes, pollution, waste generation, labor conditions, and ecosystem service
impacts. Transporting personnel and materials will increase traffic and road safety risks. Technical Assistance
and Local Area Development Plan investments may trigger further environmental risks, such as occupational
health and safety issues, waste generation, habitat alteration, vegetation clearing, contamination, increased
water abstraction, and road safety concerns. The lack of an EPC contractor and limited authority capacity for


                                                                                                                 Page 6



                                                                                                         Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project(P510120)


supervision necessitate effective oversight. The challenging terrain and climate change vulnerability are also
important factors to be considered. There are significant social challenges, such as (i) involuntary resettlement
& land acquisition, affecting 2,387 PAHs and informal vendors; (ii) labor risks related to poor working
conditions;(iii) labor influx and camps; (iv) traffic accidents, STIs and SEA/SH risks; (v) potential intensification of
tensions and social conflicts, including due to increased pressure on land and health facilities, along with the
risk of potential exclusion of vulnerable groups and elite capture; and (vi) cultural heritage impacts on sites like
modern era churches, religious sites, and graves. Regional volatility, political instability, weak governance, and
insecurity in eastern DRC exacerbate E&S risks.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Thierno Bah
   Senior Energy Specialist

   Mitsunori Motohashi
   Lead Energy Specialist

   Laurencia Karimi Njagi
   Senior Energy Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Finance

  Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning

  Ministry of Finance

 Implementing Agencies
  Ruzizi 3 Energy Limited
  Mohsin Tahir
  Project Director
  mohsin.tahir@ruzizienergy.com

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                                                                                                                    Page 7



                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Ruzizi 3 Regional Hydropower Project(P510120)


The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Thierno Bah, Mitsunori Motohashi, Laurencia Karimi Njagi

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Fowzia Hassan                          08-Aug-2025

Country Director:                      Amit Dar                               12-Aug-2025




                                                                                                          Page 8



                                                                                                  Official Use Only
