Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Parana Water Security Project (P510227)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 12/01/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04559




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 09, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510227                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         Parana-PSH                   2027

                     Operation Name            Parana Water Security Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Brazil                    Brazil                                    LATIN AMERICA AND             Water
                                                                                         CARIBBEAN

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     State of Parana           State Secretariat of Planning - SEPL      17-Nov-2025                   02-Jul-2026


                     Total Project Cost




Public Disclosure
                     290,860,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objectives are to: (a) strengthen the State of Parana's capacity to collaboratively manage
                     water security risks in a changing climate and (b) increase people's resilience to those risks in targeted areas by
                     implementing integrated and cross-sectoral interventions.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Project will adopt an integrated, multisectoral approach focusing on three interrelated topics: (a) the sustainable
                     management of water resources, which is the foundation of water security for people, the economy and biodiversity as
                     water is a shared and finite resource; (b) the water security for agriculture production, the main driver of Parana’s
                     economy, and, at the same time, the reduction of agriculture contribution to water security risks and (c) the water
                     security for potable water supply to increase its resilience to climate risks and to support the universalization goal, while
                     reducing WSS contributions to water security risks. Retroactive financing is being considered for the Project which

                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     includes 4 components: Component 1 – Strengthen climate-informed water resources management. By promoting a
                     better integrated, participatory, resilient and data-driven water resources governance and infrastructure, the
                     component contributes to reducing pressures on water resources quantity and quality and supports more effective
                     preparedness and responses to increasing climate change risks. In doing so, it lays the institutional and technical
                     foundations for improving water security across the State, with emphasis on priority areas where activities are
                     implemented in an integrated manner with other components. Subcomponent 1.1 – Modernize water monitoring,
                     information and management instruments. Subcomponent 1.2 – Improve integrated water resources governance.
                     Subcomponent 1.3 – Reduce urban and peri-urban erosion. Component 2 – Enhance agriculture water security and
                     reduce associated risks. This component is designed to enhance water security for agricultural production amid rising
                     water shortages and land degradation exacerbated by climate change. It also seeks to reduce the risks of water
                     contamination and water shortages in selected urban water sources associated with land degradation, agrochemical
                     use, animal waste and climate change. Efforts will center on strengthening institutional and technical capacities,
                     leveraging partnerships with cooperatives and local organizations, generating innovation and promoting the adoption of
                     sustainable conservation and production practices. Subcomponent 2.1. – Strengthen the State capacity to manage
                     water security risks in agriculture. Subcomponent 2.2 – Increasing Water Security for Family Farming in Areas Affected
                     by Water Deficit and Soil Degradation. Subcomponent 2.3. – Decrease agriculture contribution to water security risks in
                     urban water sources. Component 3 – Reduce water security risk for universal WSS access. This component aims to
                     enhance the climate resilience, quality, and availability of water and sanitation services by reducing reduce water
                     security risks in selected watersheds of urban water sources and addressing both infrastructure and management
                     model gaps in rural areas, in support of the universalization goals. Subcomponent 3.1 – Reduce water security risks in
                     selected urban water sources. Subcomponent 3.2 – Increase access to sustainable rural water and sanitation services.




Public Disclosure
                     Component 4 – Support Project Management. This component builds the Borrower’s capacity to implement the Project
                     by supporting fiduciary, technical, environmental, social, and monitoring activities. It provides funding for technical
                     assistance, consulting and non-consulting services, training, operating costs, and necessary goods for key government
                     agencies involved in implementation.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     In recent decades, the State of Paraná (Southernmost Brazil) has experienced significant economic growth and advances
                     in the living conditions of the population. With 11.44 million inhabitants — more than 87% living in urban areas — the
                     state represents 2.3% of the national territory, 5.6% of the Brazilian population, and 6.1% of the country's GDP in 2023.
                     Its economy is the fourth largest in Brazil and the state's Municipal Human Development Index (MHDI) evolved from
                     0.507 in 1991 to 0.749 in 2023, reflecting significant advances in education, income, and longevity. Nonetheless,
                     economic inequality is high; poverty and extreme poverty rates remain significant at 20.0% and 2.3%; and the state
                     faces persistent challenges in water resource management (only 28% of rural households have piped water, and just
                     21% have adequate sewage coverage), impacting urban supply and agricultural sustainability, particularly in rural areas.
                     The state population also faces growing challenges associated with climate variability, water resource management, and
                     ensuring water security for different uses — human, productive, and environmental. Water security faces growing risks
                     in the face of imbalances between water supply and demand, degradation of the quality of water resources, lack of
                     adequate supply solutions in rural areas, and increased frequency and intensity of droughts and floods. In the last 15
                     years, more than 5,000 extreme weather events have impacted about 7.5 million people in Paraná. Soil erosion and the
                     emergence of gullies in urban and rural areas have compromised infrastructure, silted up watercourses and degraded
                     the quality of water resources.

                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     The state is home to 305,154 agricultural establishments, of which 75% are family farms (including a small share of
                     Indigenous Peoples and traditional communities), who are increasingly susceptible to climate variability, as their
                     livelihoods depend on rain-fed crops. In the state, family farmers are organized in both the Federation of Rural Workers
                     and Family Farmers of the State of Paraná (FETAEP) and the Federation of Family Farming Workers of Paraná (FETRAF-
                     Paraná). Both are members of the State Rural Development and Family Farming Council of Paraná (CEDRAF). Since the
                     2017/18 harvest, the main agricultural crops have been suffering the effects of intense and recurrent droughts. The
                     2021/22 drought reduced precipitation by about 50%, resulting in agricultural losses of approximately 39% and losses of
                     more than R$ 31 billion. In rural areas, given high implementation costs, irrigation infrastructure – which could mitigate
                     the impacts of droughts – is still underutilized (being present in only 5% of agricultural establishments) and limit the
                     efficiency in water use. On the other hand, the state has also faced episodes of intense rainfall, such as those in 2023,
                     which caused losses of R$ 2.1 billion, affected more than 500 thousand people and caused damage to infrastructure and
                     agricultural production.
                     In rural areas, the challenges of basic sanitation also persist and only 28.2% of households have piped water, while
                     79.4% do not have adequate sanitary sewage coverage, resorting to rudimentary cesspools or discharging effluents into
                     ditches and bodies of water. In urban areas, although 92% of households are served by water supply and 79% have
                     sewage collection and treatment, the quality of service is often affected by the contamination of water sources and by
                     extreme weather events, such as floods and droughts. It is estimated that 37% of the state's urban centers already have
                     water deficits to meet future demands.
                     The project targets regions with insufficient water balance, a history of production losses, and potential competition
                     over water use. Priority areas are selected based on socioeconomic criteria, focusing on vulnerable and culturally
                     distinct groups and the Project is expected to benefit approximately 11 million inhabitants, including family farmers,




Public Disclosure
                     rural communities and vulnerable urban populations. In addition to promote improvements for integrated water
                     resources governance and expanding rural sanitation on a state scale, the Project will directly intervene in two main
                     state regions. These areas have distinct environmental and social characteristics and reflect the socioeconomic and
                     territorial diversity of Paraná, ranging from densely populated urban centers to rural communities with low access to
                     essential services. Nonetheless, they share significant vulnerabilities related to the degradation of water resources, soil
                     erosion and the effects of climate change and face structural challenges related to access to water, sanitation
                     infrastructure, and social vulnerability in the face of extreme weather events.
                     The Northwest Region of the State has a predominantly tropical humid climate with a pronounced dry season, with high
                     average annual temperatures and severe rainfall irregularity. This climatic condition, combined with sandy soils with low
                     water retention capacity, gives the region high susceptibility to erosion and loss of fertility. The intensive use of soil for
                     agricultural production, combined with disorderly urban expansion, has caused processes of environmental
                     degradation, such as the silting up of rivers and reservoirs, soil compaction and the reduction of water infiltration. Such
                     processes result in a decrease in the availability of surface and groundwater, directly impacting agriculture and human
                     supply. Recurrent droughts and degradation of riparian forests reduce aquifer recharge and increase the vulnerability of
                     rural and urban communities. The remaining ecosystems of the region, belonging to the Atlantic Forest biome, are
                     fragmented and under pressure from productive activities. The loss of vegetation cover has reduced biodiversity and
                     compromised essential ecosystem services, such as regulation of the water regime, erosion control and maintenance of
                     water quality. This region has a predominantly rural socioeconomic profile, and its economy is heavily dependent on
                     agriculture and livestock, sectors directly affected by prolonged droughts and environmental degradation. Water
                     scarcity and precarious supply systems aggravate the living conditions of rural populations, among whom family farmers
                     prevail. Only 28.23% of rural households have piped water and 79.42% lack adequate sanitary sewage. Difficulties in



                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     accessing water and sanitation directly impact public health, food security, and family income, accentuating social and
                     economic inequalities.
                     The Alto Iguaçu Hydrographic Basin houses the Metropolitan Region of Curitiba with more than 3.5 million inhabitants
                     and is characterized by high population density and accelerated urbanization, often without adequate planning, which
                     has resulted in precarious settlements and irregular occupation in risk areas and permanent protection areas at
                     riverbanks. Associated with a topography of valleys and river plains subject to flooding and aggravated by climate
                     change, these socio-spatial dynamics make a significant part of the population highly vulnerable to extreme weather
                     events (such as floods and periods of prolonged drought) and exposed to recurrent episodes of water scarcity and
                     contamination. The main water bodies in the basin suffer strong contamination from the discharge of domestic and
                     industrial effluents, in addition to siltation and degradation of the banks. The suppression of vegetation and soil sealing
                     aggravate flooding processes, reduce the natural infiltration of water and affect the water balance of the basin.
                     The state population includes several traditional groups. Paraná has the 14th largest indigenous population in the
                     country, belonging mostly to the Kaingang, Guarani and Xetá peoples. The Palmares Foundation has certified 41
                     quilombola communities and there are 39 land regularization processes ongoing in INCRA, out of the 68 quilombola
                     areas mapped in the state by the last demographic census. In total, 7,113 quilombola people (0.06% of the state
                     population) live in Paraná. State Law 15.673/2007 has also 227 recognized "faxinais" – i.e., traditional communities that
                     live off the common use of land and natural resources, raising animals freely in common areas (community breeding),
                     family farming, and extractive activities – that are mostly concentrated in the Central-South, Campos Gerais, and
                     Southern regions of the state and State Decree 3,446/07 has protected them as a special kind of protected unit (the
                     Special Areas of Regulated Use – ARESUR). However, only 30 faxinais have been recognized as ARESUR so far. The
                     Caiçara are a traditional people who live on the coast of the state, with their culture based on artisanal fishing,




Public Disclosure
                     extractive activities, and subsistence farming. They face challenges with a lack of basic sanitation and access to
                     electricity as well as the pressure from large projects and real estate speculation. Cipozeiros (“vine growers”) are
                     traditional communities living in the border region between Santa Catarina and São Paulo dedicate themselves to
                     harvesting cipó-imbé vine to produce handicrafts. The Ilhéus do Rio Paraná are a group of communities that live from
                     fishing and agriculture, many within a large federal conservation area in northwestern Paraná (APA of the Islands and
                     Floodplains of the Paraná River).
                     Since 2012, the Government of Paraná has in place instances to ensure the representation of these distinct social
                     groups in decision-making processes state policies, programs and projects that may potentially affect (positively or
                     negatively) them. These participatory bodies include, CEDRAF, the State Council of Indigenous Peoples (CEPI) and the
                     State Council of Traditional Peoples and Communities (CPCT). These state councils will play a relevant role in the
                     stakeholder engagement strategy of the Project.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project’s implementing agencies are the State Secretariat for Agriculture and Supply (SEAB), the Water and Land
                     Institute (IAT), the Paraná Rural Development Institute (IDR), the Paraná Agricultural Defense Agency (ADAPAR), and the
                     Paraná Sanitation Company (SANEPAR).
                     The State Secretariat for Agriculture and Supply (SEAB) leads efforts to promote sustainable agricultural development,
                     supply, and food security in Paraná. SEAB provides technical assistance to farmers, supports family farming, encourages
                     sustainable practices, and facilitates market access for agricultural products. Currently, SEAB serves around 850,000
                     family state, managing resources from both state and federal sources each year.



                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     The Paraná Rural Development Institute (IDR) focuses on strengthening rural development through technical assistance,
                     extension services, and the promotion of IDR supports thousands of small farmers, fostering innovation and
                     sustainability in rural communities. Operating in more than 300 municipalities, IDR reaches approximately 10,000
                     farmers annually.
                     The Paraná Agricultural Defense Agency (ADAPAR) is dedicated to protecting animal and plant health, thereby
                     safeguarding public health and the state’s economy. ADAPAR’s work includes inspections, pest and disease control,
                     product certification, and sanitary checks. With a team of about 600 technicians and inspectors, ADAPAR conducts over
                     50,000 inspections each year, helping to prevent diseases and certifying products for export.
                     The Water and Land Institute (IAT) is responsible for managing and conserving natural resources, protecting the
                     environment, and overseeing protected areas (conservation units, as defined by Brazilian law) in Paraná. IAT’s activities
                     include environmental inspections, agricultural zoning, management of protected areas, and restoration of degraded
                     lands, and overseeing dams and water infrastructure. The institute manages more than 150 conservation units covering
                     millions of hectares and carries out over a thousand conservation and inspection actions annually, and ensures the
                     proper regulation, safety, and maintenance of dams to prevent accidents and promote water security. Recent initiatives
                     include sustainable management policies and the preservation of rivers and riparian forests.
                     The Paraná Sanitation Company (SANEPAR) delivers essential sanitation services to improve public health and
                     environmental quality. SANEPAR’s responsibilities include water supply, sewage collection and treatment, and waste
                     management and ensuring the safety and maintenance of dams and water reservoirs integral to water supply systems.
                     Serving roughly 10 million residents in 345 municipalities, SANEPAR maintains an extensive network of over 40,000
                     kilometers of water and sewage infrastructure. In recent years, the company has invested billions of reais to expand and
                     upgrade its systems, aiming to increase coverage and ensure sustainable sanitation services.




Public Disclosure
                     These agencies bring significant experience in key areas relevant to Project implementation, including rural extension
                     and training, domestic and rural sanitation, water supply, maintenance and adaptation of rural roads, promotion of
                     efficient water use for irrigation and agricultural models, water monitoring, certification and inspection of soil and
                     agrochemical use, and environmental monitoring and compensation for potentially polluting activities.
                     The State Secretariat for Planning (SEPL) will oversee the overall coordination of the PSH through a Project Management
                     Unit (PMU). Each implementing agency will operate under the supervision of a Program Implementation Unit (PIU),
                     which will be established within each agency to serve as the focal point for program activities and integration with the
                     PMU.
                     The PMU is responsible for program management, monitoring, and financial administration, as well as facilitating
                     coordination among the PIUs, the World Bank, and other oversight and advisory bodies. Its main responsibilities include:
                     •        Coordinating PSH implementation and supervising technical components;
                     •        Ensuring compliance with environmental and social standards, with particular attention to the actions outlined
                     in the Project’s instruments (SEP, ESMF, RF, and ESCP);
                     •        Consolidating technical and financial reports for submission to oversight bodies and the World Bank;
                     •        Promoting institutional communication and sharing information with stakeholders.
                     To ensure effective institutional coordination and governance, a Steering Committee will be established, chaired by
                     SEPL and composed of secretaries, directors, or their designated representatives from all participating agencies. This
                     committee will support project operations, promote internal coordination, monitor implementation and results, ensure
                     ongoing oversight and corrective action during rollout, and propose necessary adjustments.
                     As part of the PSH’s institutional framework, the State Ombudsman’s Office will serve as the official channel for public
                     feedback and social participation. Through this mechanism, citizens and stakeholders can submit complaints, reports,



                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     suggestions, and comments related to Project implementation. This process strengthens transparency, enhances social
                     engagement, and ensures that Project activities are aligned with the needs and expectations of Paraná’s population.
                     It is important to note that SEPL, IAT, and IDR have prior experience with both the World Bank’s safeguards operational
                     policies and Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs), having participated in the implementation of the Parana Rural
                     Poverty Alleviation & Natural Resources Management Project (P037828), the SWAp for Parana Multi-sector
                     Development Project (P126343), and the Parana Public Sector Modernization and Innovation for Service Delivery
                     Operation (P168634).
                     The Borrower will implement a structured capacity-building program for E&S risk management, with a training strategy
                     to be submitted to the Bank within 60 days of the Effective Date and implemented on an annual basis. The Program
                     targets the PMU and all staff directly engaged in Project implementation, and will cover the ESMF, SEP, the ESCP itself,
                     applicable ESSs, the Environment and Social Incidents Response Toolkit (ESIRT), and gender-related requirements. In
                     addition, the Borrower will implement an Environmental Education Program mandated by the state environmental
                     authority for each major infrastructure work.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate
                     The Project’s environmental risk is classified as Moderate. The Project is expected to generate significant positive



Public Disclosure
                     environmental outcomes by improving water quality and availability through integrated watershed management and
                     nature-based solutions, contributing to the restoration of riparian and native vegetation, supporting biodiversity, and
                     strengthening climate resilience with adaptation and mitigation co-benefits. The promotion of sustainable agriculture,
                     efficient irrigation, and enhanced rural sanitation will help reduce erosion and pollution, while restoration efforts will
                     benefit sensitive ecosystems such as aquatic habitats, riparian vegetation, wetlands, and fragments of Atlantic Forest
                     within a mosaic of rural landscapes. Apart from these benefits, the anticipated environmental impacts include
                     localized, predictable, temporary, and/or reversible effects that can be managed with standard measures and good
                     international construction practices, as well as potential modest cumulative impacts, related to modest expansion of
                     water-efficient, supplemental irrigation. To mitigate these impacts, guidelines for the identification of potential
                     cumulative impacts will be incorporated into the updating of the State Water Resources Plan, the elaboration and
                     updating of River Basin Plans and the elaboration of the State Rural Sanitation Policy and associated studies, which
                     will be developed under the scope of the Project. Moreover, irrigation expansion will be conditioned to the obtention
                     of a water right which considers cumulative water uses in the river basins/aquifer and will strengthen water use
                     monitoring and water rights enforcement in the Project area. Key localized risks include construction-related soil
                     erosion and sedimentation; temporary noise; solid waste and effluent management, especially in areas of accelerated
                     urbanization; and operational risks such as altered aquatic habitats and ecological, pollution from agrochemicals and
                     wastewater, and localized loss of native vegetation. Sensitive receptors include aquatic ecosystems, riparian
                     vegetation, artificial wetlands and fragments of Atlantic Forest, whose ecological connectivity and conservation
                     require special attention. The Project considers standards ESS1–ESS8, ESS10 as relevants, as well as compliance with
                     OP 7.50 on International Waterways, given activities in the Paraná River and its tributaries (Ivaí, Iguaçu, Piquiri, and
                     Pirapó), which are part of the La Plata Basin and the Serra Geral Aquifer. The mitigation approach follows the


                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     mitigation hierarchy—avoiding sensitive areas whenever possible, ensuring ecological flows, employing nature-based
                     solutions and low-impact irrigation, and implementing robust measures for pollution prevention, occupational health
                     and safety, community health and safety (including dam safety), and biodiversity conservation. These actions are
                     supported by an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), whose final version will be available 30
                     days after the effective date (with subproject ESIAs/ESMPs as required by Brazil’s three-stage environmental licensing
                     and complementary instruments), an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan with monitoring and reporting
                     provisions, and institutional mechanisms to ensure effective implementation and oversight of the proposed
                     measures.
                                                                                                                                     Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Project’s social risk is rated as Moderate. As the Project will support a broad set of activities in different areas,
                     there is a diversity of social risks. At least on a conceptual basis, it is likely that: • The management of water for
                     distinct uses may potentially face challenges to ensure the participation of culturally distinct/vulnerable social groups
                     in River Basin Committees, the State Council of Water Resources, and other decision-making instances and,
                     consequently, leading to the potential control of their decisions and capture of their benefits by more influential
                     actors. • The most vulnerable family farmers (including women farmers, indigenous peoples and traditional
                     communities) may face greater challenges to benefit from irrigation programs and adopt new water
                     management/productive practices given their scarce resources to invest in new technologies and get access to
                     training and rural extension. • The deployment of wetlands and drainage works for flood/erosion control may require
                     land acquisition, potentially causing involuntary resettlement and/or temporary economic losses. • The protection of
                     springs and water sources may restrict access to land/natural resources. Despite their diversity and and justifying a




Public Disclosure
                     potential Moderate risk rating, these risks are expected to be of moderate magnitude and can be mitigated through
                     well-known and effective measures that have been incorporated in Project design. Based on the information collected
                     for the preparation of the SEP and the ESMF, and drawing on the technical meetings held with Paraná, an assessment
                     of inclusion-related risks—including the potential for tensions over resources—has been undertaken and is reflected
                     in both instruments. This assessment is also reflected in the ESS2, ESS4, ESS5, ESS7, ESS8, and ESS10 sections below.
                     Thus, conceptual risks associated with the management of water resources can be mitigated through the endorsed
                     participatory and inclusive approach adopted by the Borrower for Water Resources Management (WRM), which
                     ensures all key stakeholders are engaged – in a culturally appropriate manner – in decision-making processes. This
                     approach is well reflected in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan. Conceptual risks related with capture of project
                     benefits by the better-off is avoided through the prioritization of investments for both sanitation/water supply
                     infrastructure and climate-smart agriculture in vulnerable rural communities, favoring the access of poor family
                     farmers to rural extension and technical assistance services and ensuring their engagement from planning to
                     implementation through public consultations, participation forums, and awareness campaigns. Adverse impacts from
                     land acquisition and land use restrictions will be addressed through the development and implementation of a
                     Resettlement Policy/Process Framework fully in line with the objectives and requirements of ESS5 and the
                     implementation of Resettlement and Livelihood Restoration Plans designed with the participation of communities
                     and individuals who may face more stringent restrictions on land and natural resource uses.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards



                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 8 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                              Relevant

                      The Paraná Water Security Project is designed to deliver significant environmental and social benefits, including
                      reduced agricultural losses, increased productivity, improved rural water and sanitation, and decreased erosion
                      across the project area. These outcomes will be achieved through integrated watershed management, restoration of
                      riparian and native vegetation, and the adoption of nature-based solutions. Project interventions will strengthen
                      climate resilience and generate climate co-benefits in both adaptation and mitigation, promoting sustainable water
                      management, climate-smart agriculture, and improved sanitation. These measures will enhance the resilience of rural
                      communities to droughts and floods, contribute to carbon sequestration, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, in
                      alignment with Brazil’s commitments under the Paris Agreement. Environmental risks are rated as Moderate and
                      include potential waste generation, pollution from agrochemicals and wastewater, minor biodiversity loss, and soil
                      erosion. Construction activities may result in localized, temporary, and reversible impacts such as soil erosion,
                      sedimentation, noise, and challenges in managing solid waste and effluent, particularly in peri-urban areas.
                      Operational risks include ongoing pollution from agrochemical use, animal waste, and untreated urban and
                      agroindustrial wastewater, as well as changes to aquatic habitats. The project also recognizes the possibility of
                      cumulative impacts, especially from the potential expansion of water-efficient irrigation. However, this risk is
                      considered modest, as the project’s primary objective is to optimize water use rather than increase overall
                      consumption. To address these risks, the project will update the State Water Resources Plan, River Basin Plans, and
                      the State Rural Sanitation Policy. Social risks are rated as Moderate. These include potential land acquisition and
                      restrictions on land use, impacts on livelihoods, risks to unknown cultural heritage due to earthworks, labor influx,
                      gender-based violence, and sexual exploitation and abuse. There are also concerns about engaging a diverse range of
                      stakeholders, particularly ensuring the participation and benefit of vulnerable groups such as rural women,



Public Disclosure
                      indigenous peoples, and traditional communities. These risks are not expected to be significant and can be mitigated
                      through established measures incorporated into project design. The project emphasizes robust stakeholder
                      engagement, inclusive consultations, and accessible grievance redress mechanisms to address the concerns of these
                      groups. To manage these risks, the project will: • Develop, disclose, and implement an Environmental and Social
                      Management Framework (ESMF) covering ESS2-10, providing baseline data, impact assessment, application of the
                      mitigation hierarchy and methodology for assessing cumulative impacts. The ESMF will guide the preparation of
                      subproject-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Environmental and Social Management
                      Plans (ESMPs), as required by Brazilian procedures. Contractors for large infrastructure works will be required to
                      develop and implement Contractor Environmental and Social Management Plans (C-ESMPs) consistent with the ESMF
                      and relevant licenses, with supervising firms overseeing compliance. • Prepare a Resettlement Policy/Process
                      Framework to guide the preparation and implementation of Resettlement Action and Livelihood Restoration Plans, if
                      needed, in accordance with ESS5. • Implement a robust Stakeholder Engagement Plan, ensuring tailored approaches
                      for information disclosure, consultation, and accessible procedures for feedback and complaints. • Develop and
                      implement a Gender Action Plan, including a SEA/SH Prevention Plan, as part of the ESMF. The SEA/SH plan will set
                      behavioral standards for project workers, include service mapping for victims, and establish confidential grievance
                      and referral mechanisms. The Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) operationalizes these strategic
                      commitments, outlining the development and implementation of the ESMF, SEA/SH procedures, ESIAs/ESMPs, OHS
                      and waste management plans, grievance mechanisms, and regular monitoring and reporting to the World Bank. The
                      ESCP also commits to capacity building for local agencies and stakeholders, ensuring integration of project
                      requirements into the Borrower E&S Framework and ESF. Daily coordination of environmental and social
                      management will be overseen by the Project Management Unit (PMU), which will work closely with implementing


                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                  Page 9 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      agencies. The PMU will consolidate information, supervise implementation, and ensure timely reporting to the Bank.
                      Borrower capacity and framework consistency with the ESF will be assessed and supported through targeted
                      capacity-building activities. In summary, the Project’s approach to ESS1 is comprehensive, integrating strategic
                      planning, risk assessment, and clear commitments to ensure effective management of environmental and social risks.
                      The ESMF and ESCP provide a strong foundation, supported by institutional coordination and ongoing capacity
                      building.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      The Brazilian Legislation ensures public engagement in policy management. Decree No. 8,243/2014 created the
                      National Policy for Social Participation, outlining civil society engagement channels and information access. Law No.
                      12.527/2011 guarantees access to information, while Law No. 13,460/2017 aligns Grievance Redress Mechanisms
                      with ESS 10. The Project involves a multiplicity of stakeholders and the exclusion of more vulnerable social groups
                      from planning and decision-making processes as well as the capture of benefits by more influential actors must be
                      considered as potential Project risks. The Project is not expected to increase conflicts over water uses, even with
                      multiple stakeholders. While the Project provides extension services and financial incentives for irrigation, those will
                      only be available if included in the Farm Improvement Plan (Programa de Incentivo à Produção - PIP), and only few of
                      the PIPs are expected to recommend irrigation, as priority is given to reduce water deficits by increasing soil water
                      infiltration and retention capacity. Hence, irrigation is not expected to exceed 5000 ha, out of about 600,000 ha of
                      cropped and pasture lands in the Project area. Moreover, those irrigation schemes will be limited to small-scale,
                      water efficient, supplemental irrigation schemes designed to strengthen the climate resilience of farmers in drought-
                      prone areas. The Project will also promote water rights regularization and enforcement campaigns in priority areas



Public Disclosure
                      for managing demand, reducing user conflicts, and ensuring equitable allocation across sectors, especially in
                      vulnerable regions. Additionally, existing multistakeholder instances for participation are involved in Project design
                      and will continue to be involved in Project implementation to promote a participatory approach to water security
                      management. They include: the State Water Resources Council, the Paraná State Forum of Hydrographic Basin
                      Committees, the River Basin Committees, Council for Rural Development and Family Agriculture in Paraná, State
                      Council for Indigenous and Traditional Communities and State Council for Indigenous Peoples. Together, these bodies
                      ensure that diverse perspectives and interests are represented in decision-making processes related to water
                      resource planning and management. Information about the Project’s scope, duration, and environmental and social
                      risks has been publicly disclosed through a dedicated and user-friendly website developed for the Project’s public
                      consultation. The website was designed to ensure broad, inclusive, and accessible participation and is currently
                      collecting inputs from citizens, institutions, and other stakeholders through an online form on the Project’s potential
                      impacts and benefits, including socioeconomic aspects, environmental education, and climate change perceptions.
                      Meetings and technical visits with relevant stakeholders, including farmers in the Northwestern region of Paraná,
                      historically affected by agricultural losses due to water deficits and fragile sandy soils, were conducted. They revealed
                      key challenges such as soil degradation reducing productivity and affecting environmental conditions. Additionally, a
                      joint meeting was held in July 2025 with the Hydrographic Basin Committees of the State of Paraná, during which the
                      Program was officially presented. Furthermore, the Project has developed and – after a final review to incorporate
                      relevant feedback from the public consultation – will adopt a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) that considers the
                      different needs of distinct stakeholders involved with each component as well as the previous experience of the
                      executing agencies in disclosing information and carrying out meaningful consultations. The SEP has identified and
                      mapped key stakeholders, assessed their capacity to influence project outcomes and their level of interest on


                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                     Page 10 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      project’s activities. Among the most vulnerable stakeholders, the SEP identifies rural women and female-headed
                      households, traditional communities such as Quilombolas and faxinalenses, family and smallholder farmers, low-
                      income populations in peri-urban areas, youth, and persons with disabilities. It also identifies several State Councils,
                      as the aforementioned ones, with legitimate representation of both civil society organizations and state agencies,
                      which will be strategically engaged and strengthened to ensure the participation of impacted groups, particularly the
                      most vulnerable. In that way, the SEP establishes a strategy for continued stakeholder engagement and procedures
                      for preventing benefits from being captured by more influential actors and monitoring equitable access to project
                      benefits. The Project’s stakeholder engagement will also draw on the field engagement methodologies already
                      applied by the Paraná Institute for Rural Development (IDR) through its rural extension services, particularly to
                      smallholder farmers, ensuring continuity and effectiveness in community-level participation. The SEP describes the
                      accessible multi-channel for feedback and grievance redressing. The Office of the Ombudsman of the State of Paraná
                      (OGE) and the Sanepar Ombudsman will serve as the main channels for receiving and addressing grievances related
                      to the PSH, working in coordination with the Project Management Unit (PMU). Linked to the State Comptroller’s
                      Office, the OGE coordinates the Integrated Ombudsman Management System (SIGO), which brings together more
                      than 70 sectoral ombudsman offices, expanding territorial and thematic coverage. The system offers multiple access
                      channels—including website, email, phone, WhatsApp, in-person service, and a mobile ombudsman unit to reach
                      vulnerable groups. Complaints are registered, analyzed, and forwarded to the competent agency for response within
                      20 days, extendable by 10 days if needed. Sanepar’s Ombudsman provides similar multi-channel services and
                      maintains an average response time of 11 days. To ensure effective coordination, a standardized communication flow
                      between the ombudsman offices and the PMU will be established, ensuring traceability, consistency, and timely
                      responses. Details will be included in the ESMF and the MOP.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The project will engage direct, contracted and primary supply workers. It is not expected to involve people employed
                      or engaged in providing community labor to perform work related to its core functions. Project workers who will be
                      involved in various types of activity, that may expose them to the risks associated with outdoor work (sunstroke,
                      dehydration, skin problems such as cancer and burns, and eye problems) (exposure to heat, cold, rain, venomous
                      animals, dust, noise and radiation potentially leading to sunstroke, dehydration, skin and eye problems), the use of
                      heavy machinery and accidents (including road accidents). It is not possible to estimate the number of workers
                      simultaneously involved in the multiple activities, but it is not expected that there will be a large temporary influx of
                      workers in the same place or for an extended period. Brazilian legislation on labor terms and conditions as well as on
                      occupational health and safety standards is well aligned with the requirements of ESS 2 and allows for the
                      achievement of results materially consistent with its objectives. In addition, special provisions will be added to all
                      bidding contracts for contracted and primary suppy workers to ensure that they: a) Will comply with all applicable
                      occupational health and safety regulations and laws by: i. Taking care of the health and safety of all workers who are
                      entitled to be on the site where the work is being done. ii. Providing Occupational Health and Safety training of their
                      personnel as appropriate and maintaining training records. iii. Putting in place workplace processes for personnel to
                      report work situations that they believe are not safe or healthy, and to remove themselves from a work situation in
                      which they have reasonable justification to believe presents an imminent danger to their life or health. iv. Keeping
                      complete and accurate records of their personnel. v. Providing clear and understandable information on their terms
                      and conditions of employment under the national law, the standards of behavior that are prohibited and the
                      consequences of engaging in such prohibited behaviors (including with regards to SEA/SH). vi. Providing all necessary


                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 11 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      accommodation and welfare facilities at the locations where the work is to be carried out, including sufficient supply
                      of food, drinking water and the necessary precautions to protect their personnel from insects and pest nuisance. vii.
                      Providing personal protective equipment (PPE) for the field teams, adequate conditions for all workers, ensuring the
                      full performance of the activities, and may ensure personal accident insurance throughout all stages related to the
                      restoration actions. viii. Putting in place processes and procedures for avoiding or minimizing the potential for
                      community exposure to water-borne, water-based, water-related and vector-borne diseases as well as the spread of
                      communicable and non-communicable diseases associated with the execution of the works, the influx of temporary
                      or permanent contract-related labor. b) Will provide information to all Project Workers about the channels and
                      procedures that are in place to provide feedback and grievance redress through which workplace concerns can be
                      raised and solved without fear of reprisal and without preventing access to judicial or administrative remedies. c) Will
                      not employ or engage children under the age of 16 years as project workers and will only employ or engage children
                      over the age of 15 but under the age of 18 in project-related activities under the conditions that i) the work is not
                      hazardous for children, does not interfere with their education, and is not harmful to the child’s health or physical,
                      mental, spiritual, moral or social development, ii) a risk assessment has been conducted prior to the work
                      commencing and ii) there is regular monitoring of the health, working conditions and hours of work of the child.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant to this Project, given its emphasis on water resources management, agriculture, and water supply
                      and sanitation—sectors with considerable potential for resource consumption and pollution. The Project is
                      committed to advancing resource efficiency and pollution prevention, particularly in agriculture and water supply and
                      sanitation, in accordance with World Bank Group Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines and Good



Public Disclosure
                      International Industry Practice (GIIP). A central priority of the Project is to safeguard urban water sources and their
                      surrounding watersheds from agricultural impacts by implementing integrated, participatory watershed-level action
                      plans. These plans will promote sustainable practices—such as no-till farming, terracing, cover cropping, pasture
                      restoration, and the rehabilitation of degraded areas with native species—to enhance soil water retention and
                      infiltration, reduce runoff and erosion, and minimize pollution. To further strengthen farmers’ resilience to climate-
                      induced droughts, the Project will offer extension services and limited financial incentives for small-scale, water-
                      efficient supplemental irrigation, but only when justified in Farm Improvement Plans (Programa de Incentivo à
                      Produção - PIP). Since the primary objective is to enhance soil moisture rather than to expand irrigation coverage,
                      only a limited portion of the total area (up to 5,000 hectares out of 600,000 hectares) is anticipated to be irrigated.
                      Furthermore, the Project will support the regularization and enforcement of water rights in priority zones to improve
                      demand management, minimize conflicts among users, and promote equitable water distribution, with particular
                      attention to vulnerable regions. The Project will also support improvements in on-farm and individual water and
                      sanitation solutions, as well as farm waste management. This includes promoting the use of biodigesters for animal
                      waste, which capture biogas from organic decomposition—helping to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and generate
                      renewable energy. The digestate produced will be used as organic fertilizer, decreasing reliance on synthetic
                      fertilizers. In addition, the Project will facilitate the development and implementation of water use charges at the
                      basin level, encouraging efficient and sustainable water use and generating revenue to support Water Resource
                      Management functions. In urban settings, the Project will back the implementation of the Iguaçu Water Reserve,
                      including artificial wetlands restoration to act as natural filters for wastewater and non-point source pollution,
                      thereby improving water quality for urban supplies. The construction of a second drainage canal will divert
                      stormwater away from the raw water intake of the Iguaçu water treatment plant, reducing risks to water quality. The


                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                    Page 12 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      Project will also enhance monitoring of key urban water sources, including the assessment of conformity indices for
                      ambient water quality standards and the tracking of various water quality parameters to identify potential physical,
                      chemical, and biological risks. Project activities are expected to have a low impact on emissions and are aligned with
                      Brazil’s national mitigation objectives. Restoration of degraded areas, adoption of conservation agriculture, and use
                      of biodigesters are highlighted as measures that contribute to carbon sequestration and the reduction of methane
                      emissions. These interventions are consistent with the World Bank’s Universal Alignment List and do not involve
                      activities with high carbon lock-in risks or fossil fuel dependency, as the energy supply is predominantly renewable.
                      To address agricultural pollution, the Project will prioritize non-chemical pest control methods, and the ESMF will
                      include guidelines for developing an Integrated Pest Management Plan. When chemical pest control is necessary, its
                      use will strictly comply with WBG EHS Guidelines regarding toxicity and safety. The Project will promote the
                      responsible use of agrochemicals and bio-inputs, and will strengthen institutions such as ADAPAR and IAT to ensure
                      proper oversight, storage, and application. To address the increase in agrochemical use in Paraná, the Project will
                      provide training, technical assistance, and incentives for sustainable management, with monitoring and enforcement
                      as key components. ESCP commitments for ESS3 include adopting and implementing environmental plans and
                      programs guided by Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) prepared for infrastructure works during
                      the environmental licensing process. Contractors will be required to follow these plans and programs, ensuring
                      alignment with the ESMF and ESS3. The Project will report to the Bank on the implementation of these environmental
                      plans and programs, including any corrective and preventive actions and other requirements, in accordance with
                      environmental agency standards and routine audits. For hazardous and non-hazardous waste management,
                      contractors will prepare and implement a Waste Management Plan (WMP) in accordance with the Brazilian National
                      Waste Policy and the ESMF, aiming to manage waste in a manner consistent with ESS3. Supervising firms will monitor




Public Disclosure
                      and report on the implementation of these WMPs. The expected impacts are specific, predictable, temporary, and
                      reversible, and can be managed using standard mitigation measures. No high environmental risk activities are
                      planned under the Project. The implementing agencies (SEPL, IAT, IDR, ADAPAR, SANEPAR) are considered to have
                      strong capacity, and the Project includes components to further strengthen institutional capacity, modernize
                      governance, and expand technical assistance and extension services. Overall, resource efficiency and pollution
                      prevention measures will be assessed and detailed in the Project’s ESMF and, where necessary, in specific
                      management plans, ensuring that all activities are carried out in alignment with the ESF.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      ESS4 applies to this Project due to potential community health, safety, and security impacts arising from Project
                      activities. The Project is designed to protect ecosystem services and reduce community health risks, with a strong
                      emphasis on positive outcomes for local populations. The Project is not expected to cause a significant influx of
                      workers; any temporary labor influx induced by Project activities will be minor. There is no anticipated exposure of
                      communities to hazardous materials, further minimizing risks to community health and safety. As mentioned (ESS 2),
                      all Project contractors (as well as executing agencies) will be required to a) put in place processes and procedures for
                      avoiding or minimizing the potential for community exposure to water-borne, water-based, water-related and vector-
                      borne diseases as well as the spread of communicable and non-communicable diseases associated with the execution
                      of the works and the influx of temporary or permanent contract-related labor as well as b) provide to their workers
                      clear and understandable information on the standards of behavior that are prohibited and the consequences of
                      engaging in such prohibited behaviors (including with regards to SEA/SH). In case any project-supported activity
                      needs to retain security workers to protect their properties and personnel, the Project will comply with the Brazilian


                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      Legislation and the requirements of ESS 4. The implementing agencies and the contractors will exclusively hire
                      security personnel services from companies that are authorized to operate on this sector, provide adequate training
                      in the use of force and appropriate conduct toward citizens as required by the country’s law and report misconduct
                      to competent authorities. The Project will not fund the construction of new dams; but it will depend on the operation
                      of existing dams. The state dam safety regulator (IAT) used a recent inventory to screen for existing dams in the Alto
                      Iguaçu Watershed and Northwest Region. According to Brazilian law—which is consistent with the requirements of
                      ESS4 Annex 1—dams were classified based on their safety risks. The IAT is responsible for regulating and enforcing
                      dam safety. It has a specialized dam safety unit staffed with qualified experts and operates under comprehensive
                      regulations that meet the standards set out in ESS4 Annex 1. The Alto Iguaçu Watershed relies on four dams,
                      including a new dam set to begin filling in November 2025. These dams belong to SANEPAR, a reputable water utility
                      with a strong compliance record. As requested by Brazilian regulations, annual safety inspections and detailed
                      assessments every five years are conducted, meeting ESS4 Annex 1 requirements for periodic safety inspections.
                      Comprehensive assessments conducted in 2020 for the three original dams, along with their annual inspection
                      reports, the 2025 inspection of the new dam, and findings from the World Bank’s 2025 visit to all four dams, show
                      that the dams are in good condition and present low safety risks. There is no evidence of deficiencies that would
                      require emergency interventions, though issues related to inadequate maintenance and dam monitoring equipment
                      of the three original dams were identified, which are programmed to be resolved by December 2028, using
                      SANEPAR’s own funds. A respected engineering firm is currently updating the periodic dam safety assessments, as
                      required by Brazilian regulations, and revising safety plans for all four dams. These updates are expected to be
                      completed by December 2026, with full implementation by December 2029. The safety plans for the new dam have
                      already been prepared and implemented in line with ESS4 Annex 1. According to IAT dam safety screening, there is no




Public Disclosure
                      dam falling under the purview of ESS4 Annex 1 under the Northwest Region. Rather, there are low-risk, small to very
                      small reservoirs for farming or for potable water supply intakes, none of which could cause safety risks. The Project
                      aims to reduce vulnerability to droughts, floods, and heavy rain through physical and non-physical investments,
                      including early warning systems. Restoration of floodplain wetlands in the Alto Iguaçu Watershed will improve water
                      quality and create reserves for emergency use, helping reduce flood risks. Measures are included to reduce pollution
                      and control erosion, such as the construction of a drainage canal and the creation of recreational parks with
                      restoration of degraded areas and planting of native species. These interventions are expected to decrease sediment
                      and pollutant loads in water bodies, contributing to improved community health and safety. The Project follows a
                      mitigation hierarchy: enforcement of ecological flows, nature-based solutions, and robust pollution prevention and
                      safety measures. An ESMF will guide the Project, with Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and
                      Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) developed as required by Brazilian law. Monitoring and
                      reporting of ESS4-related risks and mitigation measures will be conducted throughout implementation. Finally, the
                      ESMF and the ESCP will include provisions to ensure ESS4 dam safety compliance, address potential adverse impacts,
                      and ensure security personnel are trained in proper conduct and use of force.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      Some works for the flood and erosion control in peri-urban areas as well as for technical adaptation of rural roads to
                      the regional hydrological dynamics may need land acquisition and may cause adverse impacts related to involuntary
                      resettlement, including temporary economic losses. Protection of water springs and water courses may impose
                      restrictions on land and natural resource uses. As the sites for these works will only be fully defined during Project
                      implementation, the Borrower is developing and will adopt a Resettlement Policy/Process Framework according to


                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      the requirements of ESS 5 and submit to Bank’s no objection within 30 days after the Project’s Effective Date, as
                      agreed in the Project’s ESCP. This framework will include inter alia: • A methodology for participatory identification
                      and assessment of adverse impacts and their significance. • A strategy for ensuring that measures to compensate
                      involuntary resettlement and restrictions on land use activities are planned and implemented with appropriate
                      disclosure of information, meaningful consultation, and the informed participation of those displaced persons in
                      deciding among the options available to them. • A participatory methodology for defining eligibility criteria for
                      various categories of displaced person and mitigating unavoidable adverse social and economic impacts from land
                      acquisition or restrictions on land use by providing timely compensation for loss of assets at replacement for both
                      physical and economic (permanent or temporary) losses and by assisting displaced persons in their efforts to
                      improve, or at least restore, their livelihoods and living standards, in real terms, to pre-displacement levels. • A
                      description of the processes and procedures that will be put in place by the Project through which displaced persons
                      will be able to provide feedback, raise concerns and attempt solution for grievances that may arise from displaced
                      persons who are dissatisfied with the eligibility criteria, community planning measures, or actual as well as for
                      resolving disputes relating to resource use restrictions that may arise between or among affected communities
                      and/or community members. • A brief review of the country’s legal framework and a proposal of measures to bridge
                      any gaps with ESS 5 requirements; • Statements of the methods of valuing affected assets, organizational procedures
                      for delivery of compensation and other resettlement assistance, the implementation and monitoring process by the
                      implementing agencies. The Resettlement Policy/Process Framework will be expanded on Resettlement/Livelihood
                      Restoration Plans as needed. No project activity needing land acquisition or restrictions on land use will started prior
                      to the implementation of the required Resettlement/Livelihood Restoration Plan.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                  Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is applicable to this Project, which aims to strengthen water security in Paraná through the sustainable
                      management of water resources, the improvement of agricultural water security, and the expansion of access to
                      potable water. The Project was designed to promote biodiversity conservation and the sustainable management of
                      living natural resources, especially through integrated watershed management, the restoration of natural habitats,
                      and the encouragement of sustainable agricultural practices. Implementation will take place in two regions:
                      Northwest Region and the Alto Iguaçu Basin. In the Northwest, the predominant biomes are mixed ombrophilous
                      forest (including Araucaria forest), cerrado, and natural grasslands, which have suffered intense fragmentation, with
                      more than 80% of the original vegetation converted to agriculture, livestock, and urban uses over the past century.
                      The remaining forest patches are highly fragmented and isolated, threatening local biodiversity and ecological
                      sustainability. In the Alto Iguaçu Basin, located in the southwest, the Atlantic Forest biome predominates,
                      characterized by hillside and mixed ombrophilous forests, with approximately 75% of the original area altered or
                      fragmented due to agricultural expansion, urbanization, and industrial activities. The Northwest region contain legally
                      protected areas, such as the APA das Ilhas da Várzeas do Rio Paraná (IUCN category V), Ilha Grande National Park
                      (IUCN category II), and Perobas Biological Reserve (IUCN category Ia), which are not expected to be directly affected
                      by Project activities. The planned activities will occur mainly in modified and degraded habitats, with no direct
                      impacts anticipated on natural or critical habitats. The ESMF will include procedures for habitat classification and
                      screening, ensuring that any interventions in sensitive areas are properly assessed and managed. The Project is
                      expected to generate significant positive impacts, such as the restoration of riparian vegetation and the protection of
                      water sources, reducing sediment and pollutant loads, improving water quality, and strengthening aquatic habitats.


                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      The promotion of sustainable agricultural practices, such as no-till farming, crop rotation, integrated crop-livestock
                      systems, and the use of bio-inputs, will help minimize soil and water degradation and support biodiversity. The
                      rehabilitation of degraded areas and the implementation of flood control infrastructure will improve water security
                      and benefit around 300,000 people. The creation and recovery of artificial wetlands (in former sand and clay mining
                      pits along the Iguaçu River) will support water purification, flood control and create a biodiversity corridor. The
                      construction of a new 5.5 km drainage channel will divert urban runoff and improve water quality, while the creation
                      of urban parks will prevent further informal settlements and restore and revegetate degraded areas. Potential
                      adverse impacts include temporary disturbance of fauna and habitats during construction, increased erosion, and the
                      risk of water body pollution. The rehabilitation of rural roads may increase sedimentation if not properly managed,
                      and restoration activities must avoid introducing invasive species or replacing native vegetation. All adverse impacts
                      will be managed through the application of the mitigation hierarchy, prioritizing the avoidance of impacts, minimizing
                      unavoidable ones, restoring affected habitats, and considering offsets only as a last resort. Mitigation measures
                      include the restoration of riparian forests and legal reserves, especially in sandy soils susceptible to erosion,
                      responsible use of agrochemicals, and actions to prevent invasive alien species. Rural roads will be improved with
                      adequate drainage and erosion control, and drainage infrastructure will be implemented to restore eroded areas.
                      Wetlands will be recovered and created from former mining pits, with the management of aquatic plants to support
                      water quality and biodiversity. The activities will be subject to environmental licensing, as required by Brazilian
                      regulations, and the preparation of specific ESIAs and ESMPs and, when necessary, Biodiversity Management Plans
                      (BMPs). Stakeholder engagement has been and will continue to be carried out throughout project preparation and
                      implementation. Local communities, family farmers, and other affected groups have been consulted regarding
                      project design and biodiversity issues. The ESMF and ESCP will define procedures for ongoing consultations and




Public Disclosure
                      grievance mechanisms. The Project will comply with Brazilian environmental laws and regulations, as well as the ESS6
                      requirements. Institutional responsibilities for biodiversity management are clearly defined, and capacity-building
                      measures will be implemented as needed. Biodiversity outcomes will be monitored through regular reports and field
                      inspections. Adaptive management will be applied to address unexpected impacts or changes in baseline conditions.
                      The Project will report to the Bank on the implementation of environmental plans and programs, including corrective
                      and preventive measures. The ESCP includes commitments to adopt and implement environmental plans and
                      programs in accordance with ESIA guidelines, ensure that contractors comply with environmental requirements,
                      monitor and report on biodiversity management results and measures, and integrate biodiversity assessments and
                      mitigation measures into the ESMF and ESCP. The Project’s integrated approach to water security, sustainable
                      agriculture, and habitat restoration is expected to provide significant benefits for biodiversity and natural resource
                      management in Paraná. Robust E&S management plans, and stakeholder engagement will ensure that risks are
                      effectively identified, avoided, or mitigated, maximizing positive outcomes for biodiversity.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                            Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      Paraná has the 14th largest indigenous population in the country. According to the latest demographic census (2022),
                      30,460 people (0.27% of the state population) self-identify as a member of an Indigenous People. They mostly belong
                      to the Kaingang, Guarani and Xetá people. Nearly 46 percent live on indigenous lands and 86 percent of the
                      municipalities of the state have with records of at least one self-declared indigenous person. The census data has
                      identified 47 indigenous areas in the state of Paraná (comprising the set formed by the officially delimited Indigenous
                      Lands and the indigenous groupings – that is, the set of 15 or more indigenous individuals in one or more spatially


                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      contiguous dwellings that establish family or community ties. The indigenous areas mapped by the Brazilian Institute
                      of Geography and Statistics (IBGE - Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística) are located in 34 municipalities and
                      comprise the following locations: • Tekoha Verá Tupã’í, Herarekã Xetá, Tekoha Mokoy Joeguá, Tekoha Ocoi, Tekoha
                      Yva Renda, Tekoha Aty Mirim, Tekoha Añetete, Tekoha Itamarã, Tekoha Pyahu, Tekoha Araporã, Tekoha Curva
                      Guarani e Guasu-Guavirá na região Oeste-Noroeste. • Faxinal, Ivaí, Marrecas e Rio d’Areia na região Centro Sul. •
                      Clevelândia, Rio das Cobras, Boa Vista, Mangueirinha, Planalto, Palmas, Kretã de Palmas, Comunidade Vitorino e
                      Barracão na região Sul-Sudoeste. • Kuaray Guata Porã, Kuaray Haxa, Takuaty, Pindoty, Guaviraty, Karaguatá Poty,
                      Tupã Nhee Kretã e Araçai na região litorânea. • Floresta Estadual, Kakané Porã, Kóhuan Já Má e Rio Negro na região
                      de Curitiba. • Queimadas, Tibagi-Mococa, Apucarana, São Jerônimo da Serra, Barão de Antonina, Pinhalzinho,
                      Laranjinha e Yvporã Laranjinha na região Norte. Among these areas, the Indigenous Peoples National Foundation
                      (Funai) identifies 34 Indigenous Lands in diverse states of land regularization. These lands cover an area of 125,324
                      hectares. The largest one -Tekohá Guasu-Guavirá – has 24,028 hectares. Two of the indigenous areas mapped by IBGE
                      are located in the intervention area of subcomponent 2.3: the Herarekã Xetá indigenous land (under demarcation, in
                      the municipality of Ivaté) and the Tekoha Verá Tupã'í (acquired by an association representing the Guarani people, in
                      the municipality of Campo Mourão). The Herarekã Xetá area – in the municipality of Ivaté – is a territory awaited by
                      the Xetá people in Paraná, who seek demarcation as historical reparation for the extermination they suffered. The
                      Xetá people were practically decimated in the 1950s. The area is in the vicinity of Serra dos Dourados, close to the Ivaí
                      River and the border with Mato Grosso do Sul. The demarcation of the Herarekã Xetá Indigenous Land has been
                      dragging on since 1999, when Funai opened a process to deal with the identification and delimitation of the territory.
                      The first Detailed Report on Identification and Delimitation (RCID) of the Xetá land was prepared in 2005, with an
                      area of 12,433 hectares (ha) being recognized. It was revised in 2013, suffering a reduction to 2,686 hectares for the




Public Disclosure
                      Xetá and houses 159 people. The Tekoha Verá Tupã'í area (4.84 hectares) was acquired by the Arandu Aty-ARA
                      Indigenous Association at the Barreiro das Frutas site (Campo Mourão). It is estimated that there is a resident
                      population of 168 people of the Guarani ethnic group. These communities may benefit from Project activities
                      envisaged under subcomponent 2.3. Since 2019, IDR-Paraná has gained some experience working in partnership with
                      1,382 families of indigenous peoples living in 14 Indigenous Lands and Funai. The work aims to strengthen agriculture
                      and food security, offering technical assistance, support for development projects, seed distribution, marketing
                      guidance, and technical training for extension workers. To provide these services to indigenous people, 21 IDR-Paraná
                      extension workers took part in a 14-month training course in Technical Assistance and Rural Extension (Assistência
                      Técnica e Extensão Rural - ATER) aimed at indigenous peoples, carried out in partnership with the State University of
                      Londrina and based on an interdisciplinary, intercultural perspective and respect and dialogue with the indigenous
                      peoples and communities. The technical assistance and rural extension service for indigenous people is carried out
                      using different methodologies in actions that involve, for the most part, food and nutritional security, production for
                      self-consumption, agricultural and non-agricultural production and basic sanitation. In Paraná, State Law 21,430/2023
                      has created the State Council of Indigenous Peoples (CEPI), separating the pre-existing State Council of Indigenous
                      Peoples and Traditional Communities in two. CEPI now comprises 26 members. Eleven of them are representative of
                      Indigenous Peoples (one of the Xetá, five of the Guarani and five of the Kaingang peoples) and two belong to civil
                      society organizations. The remaining seats are taken by state agencies. The Indigenous Peoples representatives have
                      been elected during the First State Conference of Indigenous Peoples (held in Foz do Iguaçu in December 2023). The
                      CEPI/PR aims to enable and ensure the participation of indigenous peoples in the processes of deliberation,
                      implementation and inspection of their public policies within the State of Paraná, and it is responsible for inter alia:
                      discussing, deliberating and approving the State Policy for Indigenous Peoples; monitor and participate in the
                      evaluation of state policies, programs, projects and actions aimed at the indigenous population of the State of


                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                     Page 17 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      Paraná, defining forms of monitoring and social control of the results; assist in the preparation of projects aimed at
                      the implementation of actions in the areas of health, education, culture, citizenship, sanitation, housing, agriculture,
                      livestock, environment and other support activities; indicate the priorities related to public policies aimed at
                      indigenous communities, through a survey of the communities, with the purpose of subsidizing the preparation of the
                      budget proposal of the government agencies; promote channels of dialogue with national and international
                      organizations, civil society entities, entities and bodies of direct and indirect public administration; and to prepare
                      and approve the State Plan for Public Policies for Indigenous Peoples, after consulting indigenous communities, under
                      the terms of ILO Convention No. 169. CEPI meets ordinarily every quarter and holds an annual meeting with
                      indigenous leaderships of Paraná, to present the actions promoted in the period. As part of the Technical Assistance
                      activities supported under Component 1 and 3, the Project shall ensure Indigenous Peoples are engaged in the
                      updating of the State Water Resources Plan, the Hydrographic Basin Plans and the Rural Sanitation Policy. The
                      Project’s ESCP will incorporate the requirements of ESS7 to ensure proper assessment of the TAs downstream effects
                      on IPs, meaningful consultations with IPs and their equitable access to benefits and will ensure that CEPI – as a
                      legitimate instance of Indigenous Peoples’ representation – is involved in these Technical Assistance activities. In
                      addition, the ESMF will include an assessment of the potential for significant impacts on Indigenous Peoples’ lands,
                      resources, and cultural heritage.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      Some drainage and erosion control works supported by the Project will include excavations, demolition, and
                      movement of earth. The Project’s ESMF will develop and ensure implementation (as needed) of a chance finds
                      procedure as required under ESS 8 and the country’s law. In the event of the fortuitous discovery of cultural or



Public Disclosure
                      archaeological assets in Paraná, the standard procedure is based on federal legislation (Decree-Law No. 25/1937)
                      governing national historical and artistic heritage, and on the regulations of the National Institute of Historical and
                      Artistic Heritage (IPHAN). This legislation requires: a) immediate notification to the competent authorities - IPHAN
                      and, if applicable, the Paraná State Water and Land Institute (IAT) or the Paraná State Secretariat of Culture; b)
                      stoppage and Isolation of the site that must be preserved as it was found; and c) non-intervention or attempt to
                      remove, collect, damage, or alter the found artifact as improper handling can compromise the historical, scientific,
                      and archaeological value of the find, and may also result in legal penalties. After notification, the competent
                      authorities must send experts to assess the find and define the necessary measures (nclude rescue, study, or
                      preservation actions at the site) before normal activities can be resumed. Furthermore, as part of the environmental
                      and social assessment of each subproject, the Borrower will determine the presence of listed legally protected
                      cultural heritage areas, recognized and unrecognized archeological sites, built heritage and natural features imbued
                      with cultural heritage that may be affected by the project. In such a case, the Borrower will identify this tangible
                      cultural heritage – through research and consultation with project-affected parties – and make all efforts feasible to
                      protect and preserve them in their existing location. Given the scope of its activities, the Project will not use cultural
                      (tangible or intangible) heritage of project affected parties for commercial purposes. In the state of Paraná the
                      preservation of the archaeological, historical, artistic and natural heritage is an attribution of the Cultural Heritage
                      Coordination (CPC) under the State Secretariat of Culture (State Law No. 1,211/53 and State Decree 4,841/2015 and
                      8,352/2021).

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant




                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 18 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      The project does not involve Financial Intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                       Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                       In Part
                       The task team has carried out an assessment of the Borrower Environmnetal and Social Framework (BESF) and find
                       out that its main elements related to environmental and social impact assessment processes, labor and working
                       conditions (including OHS standards), pollution prevention and management, community health and safety,
                       biodiversity conservation, indigenous peoples consultation, the protection of cultural heritage and stakeholder
                       engagement allow – with the addition of a few supplementary measures – achieve outcomes that are materially
                       consistent with the objectives of the ESSs. The supplementary measures have been discussed with the Borrower,
                       agreed and incorporated in the Project’s Environmental and Social Management Framework.
                       The Borrower will develop and implement a Resettlement Policy/Process Framework to address eventual adverse
                       impacts related to involuntary resettlement and restrictions on land use and ensure participation of vulnerable social
                       groups in decision-making processes, but can mostly rely on the instances for social participation it has in place
                       (particularly the CERH, the Paraná State Forum of Hydrographic Basin Committees, the River Basin Committees,



Public Disclosure
                       CEDRAF, CEPCT and CEPI). The Borrower will also be able to use the feedback and grievance redressing mechanisms it
                       has in place, its procedures for environmental and social impact assessment and its labor management procedures
                       (including Occupational Health and Safety standards). Specific measures will be incorporated in bidding documents to
                       ensure the prevention of SEA/SH incidents.



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       There are no financing partners.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     During the first months of project implementation, the Borrower will complete the preparation of:
                     •       The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the primary and most appropriate instrument
                     for E&S assessment, given that the project comprises a series of subprojects whose risks and impacts cannot be
                     determined until their details are defined.
                     •       The final version of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).
                     •       The Resettlement Policy/Process Framework.
                     •       The Gender Action Plan/SEA-SH Prevention Plan (as part of the ESMF).


                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
                               The World Bank
                               Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     As agreed in the Project’s ESCP, the Borrower will additionally:
                     Establish a Project Management Unit staffed with qualified professionals for the management of environmental and
                     social risks as well as the implementation of the Project’s community communication/stakeholder engagement strategy
                     (as defined in the SEP). The PMU will be responsible for periodical reporting on the Project’s E&S performance to the
                     Bank.
                     Implement a capacity building plan for members of all implementing agencies and partner municipalities to enhance
                     awareness and knowledgement of the requirements of the relevant ESSs, Special attention will be given to reporting on
                     incidents and accidents that may have a significant impact on the environment, society and project workers and on the
                     behavioral standards that project workers are expected to comply with. also disclose project information to enable
                     stakeholders to understand the project’s risks, impacts, and opportunities, and will conduct consultations with key
                     stakeholders. These consultations will use both existing participatory mechanisms for policy decision-making and online
                     channels, which are proportionate and suitable for early-stage engagement when subprojects are not yet fully defined.
                     Promptly report on any incidents and accidents that may have a significant impact on the environment, society and
                     project workers as well as on significant changes in the BESF that may reduce its capacity to manage E&S risks in a
                     manner proportionate to the Project’s risk level and adequate to achieve outcomes materially consistent with the
                     objectives of the relevant ESSs.
                     The Bank task team – which shall at least in the first years of project implementation be composed by one
                     Environmental and one Social Development specialist (given the variety and large number of activities supported by the
                     Project) – will conduct semi-annual implementation support missions, including field visits and technical meetings with
                     the PMU and the implementing agencies technical staff.




Public Disclosure
                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Marie-Laure Lajaunie                  Title:          Lead Water Resources Management
                                                                                                   Specialist

                      Email:                 Mlajaunie@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Irene Natalia Wasilevsky              Job Title:      Senior Agriculture Economist

                      Email:                 iwasilevsky@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                                  Page 20 of 21
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                           Marie-Laure Lajaunie, Irene Natalia Wasilevsky

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                  Ana Carolina Rodrigues Velloso Cordeiro

                     ADM Social Specialist:                         Alberto Costa




Public Disclosure




                    Dec 09, 2025                                                                                     Page 21 of 21
