Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                         The World Bank
                                                                         Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)



                                                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure _For
                  Authorized          Public Disclosure Authorized




                       Official Use Only_
                                                                                       Project Information Document (PID)

                                                                                      Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Jun-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01263




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data
                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
                          Indonesia, Mongolia,           P510359                     Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in
                          Mongolia, Papua New                                        Selected Areas (AWSPSA)
                          Guinea, Philippines,
                          Philippines, Philippines,
                          Philippines, Thailand,
                          Thailand, Thailand,
                          Thailand
                          Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          07-Jul-2025                 31-Oct-2025                   Water




_For Official Use Only_
                          Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
                          Investment Project             Department of Finance       Department of Public
                          Financing (IPF)                                            Works and Highways
                                                                                     (DPWH), Department of
                                                                                     the Interior and Local
                                                                                     Government (DILG)

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to safely managed water supply and sanitation services
                          and improve the performance of water service providers in selected areas of the Philippines.

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                          293.96

                            Total Financing                                                                                               293.96
                                       of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              275.38
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


                                                                                                                                             Page 1
                                   The World Bank
                                   Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)



                           DETAILS
                           Private Sector Investors/Shareholders

                           Equity                                                   Amount             Debt                                                       Amount

                               Government Contribution                                     289.55          Commercial Debt                                                   3.08

                                   Government Resources                                     14.16             Unguaranteed                                                   3.08

                                   IBRD                                                    275.38

                               Non-Government Contribution                                    1.32

                                   Private sector Equity                                      1.32

                           Total                                                           290.87                                                                            3.08




_For Official Use Only_
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
                          Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                   Concept Review Decision
                          Substantial                                                                    The review did authorize the preparation to continue




                          Other Decision (as needed)

                          B. Introduction and Context

                          Regional Context
                           1. Water is the cornerstone of development and climate resilience in the East Asia and the Paciﬁc (EAP) region.
                           Home to over 2.1 billion people, the region has lifted hundreds of millions out of poverty and is one of the world's
                           fastest-growing regions. However, it is also one of the most vulnerable to climate change, primarily through water-
                           related risks. Water security is integral to the region’s sustainable economic growth including through agriculture,
                           tourism and other sectors with high growth potential. It supports 700 million water-dependent jobs, and is essential for
                           healthy populations, food security, and sustaining healthy ecosystems1. However, increasing water stress, climate
                           change, poor infrastructure, and fragmented governance threaten sustainable water management and growth.
                           2. Water security in EAP also has a substantial global reach. EAP’s water security is crucial to global food security,
                           particularly through rice exports to Asia and Africa. However, water stress and climate change threaten these systems,


                           1
                             See Water for Shared Prosperity (World Bank, 2024). Water security is defined as “the availability of an acceptable quantity and quality of water
                           for health, livelihoods, ecosystems, and production, coupled with an acceptable level of water-related risks to people, environments, and
                           economies” (Grey and Sadoff 2007). Sanitation is part of ensuring water security as it protects the quality of water supplied and water resources.

                                                                                                                                                                             Page 2
                                The World Bank
                                Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                          disproportionately impacting the poor. The 2007-2008 food crisis and recent record-high rice prices2 highlight the
                          linkages between water management and global food markets; while EAP’s contribution to the global hydrological cycle
                          – through its water embedded in trade3 – underscores its importance in promoting eﬀective water management and
                          addressing climate risks.
                          3. The EAP region faces increasing water demand driven by urban development, population growth, and climate
                          change, with droughts and ﬂoods already imposing high costs: water risks and associated costs are increasing
                          throughout the region. Although largely urbanized (62 percent), with some of the world's largest megalopolises (e.g.
                          Jakarta, Mega Manila) and rapidly growing metropolitan regions (e.g. Ulaanbaatar, home to over half of Mongolia’s
                          population), a substantial share of EAP’s population remains rural, including Indonesia (41 percent) and Thailand (46
                          percent). Several countries, including the Philippines (52 percent), Vietnam (61 percent), Laos PDR (62 percent),
                          Cambodia (74 percent), and Papua New Guinea (66 percent), have predominantly rural populations that are at risk of
                          both floods and droughts. Global estimates suggest that by 2050, water scarcity could reduce median GDP by 8 percent
                          in high-income countries, and up to 15 percent in lower income nations. The EAP region has already incurred some of
                          the costliest disasters, with annual losses exceeding US$300 billion.
                          4. Despite signiﬁcant strides in advancing water access and management for people, food, and the planet, critical




_For Official Use Only_
                          gaps remain. The region has expanded access to safely managed water supply4, with 78 percent of the population
                          beneﬁting from improved services, over 80 million people still lack access to basic drinking water services5. Over 154
                          million require improved sanitation facilities that are essential for water security and to water quality. Whereas upper MICs
                          such as Indonesia and Mongolia post 63.8 and 44.2 percent access to basic water, and 30.3 percent and 39.3 percent access
                          to safely managed water; lower-middle-income countries such as PNG trail behind, with 50.2 percent access to at least basic
                          water services.6 For sanitation coverage, while Indonesia posts 88.2 percent access to at least basic sanitation, and Mongolia
                          reports 66 percent access to safely managed sanitation7 and 4 percent access to basic services, PNG posts 19.3 percent
                          access to at least basic services. Groundwater overdrafts remain widespread across the region, and deteriorating water
                          quality further strains the availability and sustainability of water resources (an estimated 80 percent of the region’s river
                          water is polluted). EAP countries also need to increase water storage to address growing demands. These challenges
                          underscore the need for both targeted and strategic investments to enhance water security and resilience against
                          mounting climate change related risks.


                          3 Rice prices in Asia have reached a 15-year high due to concerns over global supplies, exacerbated by dry weather in Thailand and an export ban

                          by India. Thai white rice prices rose to US$648 per ton, marking a nearly 50% increase over the past year. Thailand, the second-largest rice exporter,
                          the government has been urging farmers to cultivate less water-intensive crops as the country faces significant rainfall deficits—40% below
                          normal—while limiting planting to conserve water for domestic use amidst looming drought conditions linked to El Niño - The government
                          previously asked growers to reap only one crop this year. See. The Straight Times, November 15, 2024.
                          3
                            GCEW (2024)
                            4
                              Safely managed water refers to water from an improved water source accessible on-premises (i.e., located within the dwelling, yard, or plot),
                            available when needed (i.e., “regulators may specify different thresholds for different types of utilities. Where national or locally relevant
                            standards for hours of service are not available, a minimum of 12 hours per day will be used as the global benchmark for ‘available when needed’”),
                            and free from fecal and priority chemical contamination.
                            5
                              Basic drinking water refers to water from an improved source, provided collection time is not more than 30 minutes for a roundtrip, including
                            queuing.
                            6
                              Since safely managed drinking water and sanitation services meet the criteria for basic services, the statistics on the population with basic
                            services often include the population with safely managed services. The JMP uses the term ‘at least basic services’ to be clear that the statistic
                            refers to populations with either basic or safely managed services.
                            7
                              Safely managed sanitation refers to use of improved facilities that are not shared with other households and where excreta are safely disposed
                            of in situ or removed and treated offsite.

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3
                                   The World Bank
                                   Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                              The region faces three main challenges to improving its water security and resilience: low water productivity, the need
                              for improved service quality and performance across the sector, and fragmentation in water management, which
                              undermines eﬀective water governance throughout the EAP region.

                              5. The region’s water productivity is insufficient for its level of development and the growing pressures on its water
                              resources. Water productivity in the EAP region - measured by the economic benefits produced by water - is less than
                              half that of Europe and Central Asia (US$48.1 per cubic meter) and North America (US$47.0 per cubic meter). The global
                              average for water productivity stands at US$22.1 per cubic meter, with high-income EAP countries such as Australia and
                              Japan achieving US$133.1 and US$57.2 per cubic meter, respectively. Upper middle-income countries (MICs), such as
                              Thailand and Indonesia, report notably low water productivity rates of US$7.7 and US$4.8, respectively. Lower-income
                              MICs, including the Philippines and Lao PDR, post productivity rates of US$4 and US$2.6 per cubic meter, respectively,
                              and rely heavily on already strained water resources.8 Enhancing water productivity and addressing infrastructure gaps
                              could alleviate water scarcity and its economic impacts.
                              6. Improvements in service quality and performance are essential across the sector. Non-Revenue Water (NRW)
                              rates in EAP countries approximate 30 percent, with upper-MICs like Thailand and Indonesia reporting respective rates




_For Official Use Only_
                              of 30 and 34 percent. Many lower middle-income Pacific Island countries post even higher rates, such as PNG with an
                              average NRW of 42 percent. Specific areas can experience significantly worse conditions, as exemplified by Kiribati,
                              where NRW reaches an alarming 90 percent. These inefficiencies represent both wasted resources and missed
                              opportunities to enhance service delivery.
                              7. Similarly, in irrigation, deteriorating infrastructure hampers efforts to improve water efficiency and demand
                              management. In Indonesia, a leading rice producer, agriculture accounts for 80 percent of water consumption, and
                              small-scale irrigation is vital to over 20 percent of farmers, often from the poorest regions. Despite improvements in
                              recent years, the growth of national rice production coupled with infrastructure damage and limited maintenance
                              budgets have created a cycle of “build, neglect, and rebuild,” resulting in poor performance and low productivity.
                              Although local governments receive funds from the central government for small-scale irrigation, budgets are
                              insufficient, leading to poor maintenance and deteriorating infrastructure and service delivery.
                              8. This “build, neglect, rebuild” cycle challenges water and sanitation infrastructure, underscoring the need for a
                              comprehensive approach focused on local governance, effective systems, regulation, and incentives. Sustainable
                              operation and maintenance (O&M) of this infrastructure is often neglected, resulting in insufficient tariffs to cover costs,
                              inadequate maintenance, and poor services. Ineffective monitoring and data management further hinder water service
                              performance, since inadequate data collection limits understanding of supply systems, usage, and infrastructure
                              conditions, making it difficult to address these issues effectively.
                              9. Fragmentation in water management undermines eﬀective water governance throughout the EAP region. Few
                              countries have dedicated water ministries or agencies, leading to overlapping responsibilities and challenges budgeting
                              and planning for resilience. This lack of central oversight limits collaboration, leading to ineﬃciencies. For instance, the
                              Philippines has over 30 water-related agencies with overlapping mandates and functions, hindering cohesive policy
                              formulation. This fragmentation results in uncoordinated investments that undermine water security and progress
                              toward goals. The absence of a dedicated national agency for universal WSS coverage risks inefficient resource
                              allocation. Recent policy reforms, such as those supported by the Philippines’ First Energy Transition and Climate

                          8
                            World Bank. 2021. World Development Indicators: Water productivity 2021 total (based on constant 2015 US$ GDP per cubic meter of
                          total freshwater withdrawal). Accessed at : https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ER.GDP.FW TL.M3.KD

                                                                                                                                                       Page 4
                                   The World Bank
                                   Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                              Resilience Development Policy Operation aim to address these issues by supporting the establishment of clear lines of
                              accountability and responsibility.
                              10. There is an urgent need for sector-wide transformation to eﬀectively respond to existing access and service gaps
                              across the water sector, the challenges of climate change, and growing demand. This transformation should encompass
                              infrastructural and technological advancements alongside institutional reforms that facilitate integrated water
                              resources management (IWRM). By embracing innovative solutions and fostering stakeholder collaboration, EAP
                              countries can ensure that their water systems are resilient and adaptive to future uncertainties.
                              11. There is likewise a pressing need to increase public and private sector ﬁnancing for water security in the region.
                              The annual ﬁnancing gap to achieve Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) WSS targets 6.1 and 6.29 is nearly US$3 billion
                              from 2017 to 2030. Current WSS investments lag behind countries with similar income and development levels. This
                              underfunding, exacerbated by fragmented mandates, undermines water security and related education, health, and
                              food security goals. While some EAP countries have the potential to access private capital, others need to improve their
                              creditworthiness to attract investments. Although ﬁnancing alone will not solve the water crisis, the private sector can
                              provide capital, management expertise, and technical innovations to lower operating costs, increase revenues, enhance
                              eﬃciency, promote a circular economy10, and improve climate resilience with the right incentives and enabling




_For Official Use Only_
                              environments.
                              12. Integrated approaches and regional collaboration can help EAP countries address their water/climate risks.
                              Climate change, rising population demands, and urbanization underscore the importance of water, but ineffective
                              governance and fragmented regulatory frameworks hinder necessary reforms. This leaves the region vulnerable to
                              water-related crises with significant social and economic implications. A "water momentum" has emerged, due to the
                              increasing visibility of climate change exacerbated water security gaps, offering a chance to prioritize investments in
                              water infrastructure, governance reforms, and services. EAP countries can leverage this momentum and foster regional
                              collaboration through policy dialogue and technical exchanges to address common water security and resource
                              management challenges. For example, archipelagic and island countries like Indonesia, the Philippines, and the Pacific
                              confront similar water scarcity and sanitation issues and cab benefit from shared knowledge and strategic approaches.
                              13. The Philippines exemplifies many of the region’s water security challenges: too much, too little, too polluted,
                              with areas of high performance and others facing deep access and service gaps. As one of the fastest-growing
                              emerging markets, the country faces signiﬁcant population growth, urbanization, and industrialization, requiring
                              substantial investments in WSS infrastructure. It is also one of the countries most impacted by water-related disasters
                              and confronts the challenges of too much, too little, or too polluted water — all increasingly exacerbated by climate
                              risks. These risks may worsen existing inequalities in infrastructure and quality and access gaps in WSS services. As an
                              archipelagic nation, the Philippines has a diverse population and geography. Its efforts to improve water service quality


                          9
                            SDG 6 seeks to ensure safe drinking water and sanitation for all, focusing on the sustainable management of water resources, wastewater and
                          ecosystems, and acknowledging the importance of an enabling environment. In the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, countries have
                          committed to engage in systematic follow-up and review of progress towards the Goals and targets, using a set of global indicators.
                          SDG target 6.1 is: ‘By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all.’ To track progress towards the target,
                          indicator 6.1.1 monitors the proportion of population using safely managed drinking water services.
                          SDG target 6.2 is: ‘By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special attention
                          to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations.’ To track progress towards the target, indicator 6.2.1a monitors the proportion
                          of population using safely managed sanitation services. See. https://sdg6data.org/en
                          10
                              World Bank. 2021. Water in Circular Economy and Resilience (WICER). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. Accessed at
                          https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/water/publication/wicer

                                                                                                                                                                              Page 5
                                    The World Bank
                                    Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                               and coverage echo broader regional challenges and opportunities to enhance water security and climate adaptation.11
                           Sectoral and Institutional Context
                                 Philippines Sectoral and Institutional Context
                               14. Access to climate-resilient WSS services is crucial to water security and to inclusive and sustainable growth in the
                               Philippines. Reliable WSS services ensure consistent water supply, safeguarded from contamination, reducing
                               vulnerabilities to scarcity and pollution. Access to safe and sustainable water is essential to the health and livelihoods of
                               its 117 million inhabitants and to economic growth. It supports sectors critical to its economy, food security, energy
                               production, and urban growth, among others. Inadequate WSS contributes to disease outbreaks, while poor sanitation
                               impacts the environment, water resources, and the overall health and quality of life of Filipinos, especially in the poorest
                               areas, contributing to malnutrition, child stunting, and perpetuating poverty.12 As an archipelagic country comprising
                               over 7,600 islands, the Philippines faces additional local level challenges in expanding sustainable WSS access.
                               15. Recognizing the importance of enhanced WSS, the Government of the Philippines (GoP) aims to achieve universal
                               access to safe WSS by 2030 as embodied in its 2020 Philippine Water Supply and Sanitation Master Plan (PWSSMP)
                               and national development strategies. The PWSSMP outlines the key strategies and reforms needed to meet WSS




_For Official Use Only_
                               coverage targets, including strengthening policies and regulations to improve coordination and address fragmented
                               institutions, enhancing the institutional capacity of local government units (LGUs) and water service providers (WSPs)
                               responsible for WSS service delivery, and expanding climate-resilient WSS infrastructure coverage. Addressing WSS
                               service gaps is also a priority in the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2023- 2028 and the National Climate Change
                               Adaptation Plan (NCCAP) 2011-2028, which emphasize the GoP’s commitment to expand and upgrade WSS
                               infrastructure and services.
                               16. Access to sustainable WSS is a socio-economic priority in the Philippines due to its cross-sectoral impacts, made
                               more urgent by climate change. WSS services are crucial to households and industries and the sustainability and
                               development of urban and tourism areas. Over 47 percent of the population lives in rapidly growing urban areas,
                               contributing more than 75 percent to the country’s GDP. It is equally vital for the 53 percent of the population in rural
                               areas who primarily depend on agriculture. Safe and sustainable water is essential for agricultural production and food
                               security nationwide. WSS is also vital for the tourism sector, a key contributor to employment and economic
                               development.13 However, the Philippines is confronting the challenges of too much, too little, or too polluted water, all of
                               which will be exacerbated by climate risks. Some estimates suggest the country may experience an average annual
                               economic decline of 0.7 percent in GDP up to 2050 due to climate risks.14 The risks from ﬂooding, droughts, and poor
                               water quality are expected to heighten existing inequalities in infrastructure and quality and access gaps in WSS.
                               17. There are signiﬁcant gaps and inequalities in access to safe WSS services across urban-rural, poor, and non-poor
                               areas. As of 2022, 48 percent of the population has access to safely managed water, signiﬁcantly lagging behind the
                               regional average of 78.4 percent. Access to safely managed sanitation was about 63 percent, below the regional average

                          11
                             The Philippines is home to 9.4 million people identified as indigenous, about 8.7 percent of the population. According to a recent WB survey and
                          analysis, more households from IPs and Muslim ethnic groups lack access to improved drinking water, sanitation, and electricity compared to non-IP
                          groups (No Data, No Story: Indigenous Peoples in the Philippines, World Bank, 2024)
                          12
                              World Bank. 2023. Philippines Economic Update: Safe Water and Sanitation for All. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
                          https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/34208282
                          13
                             Tourism contributed up to 12 percent to the GDP in pre-COVID years.
                          14
                             World Bank 2023. Philippines Economic Update. https://www.worldbank.org/en/events/2023/12/07/philippines-economic- update-development-
                          dialogues-safe-water-and-sanitation-for-all.

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 6
                                    The World Bank
                                    Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                               of 69 percent15. Only 7 percent of households had sewer connections, while 70 percent relied on septic tanks which are
                               often poorly constructed with unsealed bottoms, and outside Metro Manila, are not emptied regularly, preventing
                               proper functioning. An estimated 4 million people, or 3 percent of the population, still practices open defecation (OD),
                               which is higher than the 1.1 percent regional average. Poor sanitation adversely impacts the environment and pollutes
                               water resources. There are signiﬁcant disparities in WSS coverage and quality between rich and poor populations, with
                               basic WSS being the lowest in the country’s poorest communities. In 2022, rural access to safely managed water stood
                               at 35 percent, compared to 62 percent in urban areas.16
                               18. Expanding WSS and hygiene (WASH) services is intrinsically linked to public health, environmental sustainability,
                               and economic development, underscoring the urgent need to address these gaps. Inadequate WASH services contribute
                               to the occurrence of preventable diseases like diarrhea and amoebiasis, posing risks to public health. Poor WASH is also
                               linked to malnutrition and child stunting, with one in four Filipino children under ﬁve being shorter than the global
                               average for their age. The Philippines ranks low in the region in terms of access to basic drinking water and sanitation17
                               in schools. Only 45 percent of schools provide basic access to drinking water, placing the country at the bottom of its
                               peers, while over a quarter of schools have no water service. Additionally, only 25 percent of schools meet the ideal
                               functional toilet-to-student ratio, negatively impacting student attendance and academic performance, especially




_For Official Use Only_
                               for girls.18 This negatively impacts capital formation and economic growth prospects going forward. Increasing access to
                               WASH in poorer communities, including inclusive WASH facilities19 in public schools and health facilities, is crucial to
                               improving health, reducing poverty, and promoting more equitable economic development. Expanding access to WASH
                               is also essential for promoting the key drivers of economic growth, including the burgeoning tourism sector, while
                               protecting the water security and natural resources of these tourism destinations. Many islands struggle to balance the
                               water demands of their expanding populations and the tourism sector. Groundwater abstraction is prevalent in these
                               areas, leading to seawater contamination of freshwater sources. Given the sector's signiﬁcant contribution to GDP,
                               sustainable WSS services are vital to the continued growth of these destinations and the country.20
                               19. The key challenges to achieving the universal WSS coverage targets set out in the PWSSMP can be summarized
                               into three interrelated dimensions: institutions, regulation, and investments, as follows:
                                     ▪ Institutional challenges. In the Philippines, local governments are responsible for providing WSS services,
                                     while the national government is responsible for setting policies for water resource allocation, service
                                     regulation, and pricing, among others.21 However, the institutional arrangements governing WSS services are
                                     complex at both the national and local levels. At the national level, over 30 water-related agencies with
                                     overlapping mandates and functions impede coordinated planning, allocation, and management of water

                          15
                             World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and
                          Hygiene (JMP).
                          16
                             Ibid.
                          17
                             Basic sanitation refers to the use of improved facilities which are not shared with other households.
                          18
                             The absence of private and safe sanitation facilities discourages girls from attending school, especially during their menstrual cycles. This lack of
                          privacy and safety can lead to higher absenteeism rates among female students. Improving WASH facilities in schools is crucial to enhancing female
                          student attendance, health outcomes, and overall educational achievements in the Philippines. World Bank. 2008. Main report. Vol. 2 of 2
                          Washington, DC: World Bank. https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/9581753
                          19
                             Inclusive WASH facilities are safe and accessible to everyone in a community, including people with disabilities, children, older people, and pregnant
                          women.
                          20
                             The Philippines Statistical Authority (PSA) reports that tourism directly contributes 8.6 percent of GDP and 12.9 percent of total employment in
                          2023. References https://psa.gov.ph/statistics/tourism
                          21
                             Some national agencies also undertake WSS projects through funds from lawmakers and their own budgets

                                                                                                                                                                              Page 7
                                     The World Bank
                                     Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                                      resources necessary for water supply, irrigation, and hydropower. At the local level, the 1991 Local
                                      Government Code (LGC) grants LGUs vast authority to implement, operate, and regulate WSS projects and
                                      services. However, LGUs generally lack the capacity to undertake and sustain long-term, capital-intensive WSS
                                      projects and programs. Challenges include: (i) limited technical capacity to plan, implement, operate, and
                                      maintain WSS projects; (ii) insuﬃcient ﬁnances to cover investment and operations costs; (iii) lack of project
                                      economies of scale rendering WSS services more expensive; and (iv) insuﬃcient water resources. These
                                      constraints have led to siloed, ad hoc, and ineﬃcient WSS projects and, in some cases, disputes over water
                                      resources among LGUs.
                                      ▪ Weak regulation and incentives. The water sector also suﬀers from weak regulation of service standards
                                      and pricing that limit the expansion of WSS services. Regulatory bodies, such as the National Water Resources
                                      Board (NWRB), Local Water Utilities Administration (LWUA), the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage
                                      System (MWSS) Regulatory Oﬃce, and other contracts for public- private partnerships (PPPs), impose diﬀerent
                                      service standards and tariﬀ-setting mechanisms. Generally, these bodies fail to enforce water quality,
                                      availability, and sanitation service standards. With the exception of PPPs, they tend to adopt arbitrary and low,
                                      subsidized tariﬀs. Most LGU-run WSPs lack separate ﬁnances and dedicated staﬀ and rely on centralized LGU




_For Official Use Only_
                                      budgets. In the absence of clear regulation, governance, and performance monitoring that incentivize
                                      reliability and expansion of WSS services, WSPs are trapped in a cycle of build-neglect-rebuild. This
                                      undermines the quality and sustainability of WSS services.
                                      ▪ Investment gaps. It is estimated that US$1.8 billion will be required up to 2030 to meet the PWSSMP
                                      targets. Of this amount, US$873 million, or 48 percent, will be for water supply improvement/expansion needs;
                                      and the remainder for sanitation improvement/expansion. The PWSSMP identiﬁes the following sources of
                                      ﬁnancing to meet these investment needs:(i) tariﬀ revenues and public funding; and (ii) various ﬁnancing
                                      sources, including (a) private ﬁnance through PPPs; (b) commercial ﬁnance from private ﬁnancing institutions
                                      (PFIs); (c) funding from government ﬁnancing institutions (GFIs); and (d) development ﬁnance. However,
                                      annual national government budget allocations only cover 15 percent of the required investments while LGU
                                      investments in WSS are not monitored. A 2022 study by the World Bank showed that LGUs will require both
                                      technical and ﬁnancial support from the national government to meet the PWSSMP targets.22
                               20. As highlighted in a recent gender gap analysis of the Philippines’ WSS sector23 enhancing women’s participation
                               in water utilities is essential for improving WSS services and promoting the health and well-being of families. Although
                               the 2009 Magna Carta for Women mandates 40 percent female membership in development councils, women remain
                               significantly under-represented in the WSS sector at all levels. Less than one in five workers and only 23 percent of
                               licensed engineers and managers are women. Women's involvement has been shown to improve the efficacy of water
                               projects six to sevenfold and enhance customer satisfaction. Including women and marginalized groups in leadership
                               roles is crucial for achieving SDG5 and improving access to WASH, thereby reducing gender disparities in health,
                               nutrition, and economic opportunities. A 2023 gender impact study in Maguindanao revealed that providing basic water
                               services to schools not only benefited students and households but improved women's health by alleviating the burden
                               of water collection. This allowed women to perform daily tasks more efficiently, enhanced their self-esteem, and




                          22
                               World Bank. 2022. Advisory Services and Analytics. Strengthening PH Water Supply and Sanitation Services.
                          23
                               The World Bank conducted a gender gap analysis in the WSS sector in February 2025.

                                                                                                                                                      Page 8
                                     The World Bank
                                     Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                               enabled men to focus on productive activities while children could concentrate on their schoolwork24.
                               21. The GoP is advancing policy reforms to clarify and strengthen the national government’s role in addressing these
                               WSS gaps. The Water Resources Management Oﬃce (WRMO) was established in 2023 to harmonize government policies,
                               plans, and programs for irrigation, water supply, ﬂood control and hydropower. The WRMO serves as a transitional agency
                               to facilitate the creation of the Department of Water Resources (DWR) under the proposed National Water Resources
                               Act, which is pending in the Senate. The DWR will lead policy-making and inter-government coordination to ensure long-
                               term water security, resilience to climate-induced water risks, and universal access to safe WSS services. The proposed
                               DWR law also ensures integration of gender equality into water resource management planning, policy making, and
                               infrastructure. It furthermore includes the establishment of the Water Regulatory Commission (WRC) which will serve
                               as an independent economic regulator that will standardize regulations and policies for all WSS providers and monitor
                               provider performance. This will promote operational eﬃciency and accountability nationwide. The GoP has likewise
                               encouraged LGUs to establish local water economic enterprises (LWEE) to improve WSS service governance and
                               sustainability. These LWEEs will be supported through aﬃrmative actions to enable them to meet the 40 percent female
                               participation requirement of the MCW, empowering qualified female candidates for positions in these enterprises.
                               Finally, the GoP recently approved the Uniﬁed Resource Allocation Framework (URAF) to guide national funding of




_For Official Use Only_
                               WSS projects. The URAF prioritizes support for areas that are poor and lagging, have access gaps to safe WSS,
                               experience a high incidence of waterborne diseases, and are exposed to high climate risks.
                               22. The proposed US$240.6 million Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (the AWSPSA) will
                               feature a sustainable approach to WSS projects that will help address gaps in institutions, regulation, and investments.
                               The proposed operation will improve and expand WSS services in selected areas such as islands and poor and lagging
                               areas with WSS service gaps. In terms of institutional and regulatory reforms, the project will operationalize the URAF
                               and the policy underlying the establishment of LWEEs to ensure the sustainability of service provision. The AWSPSA will
                               highlight a cooperation framework for WSS among the national government, provinces, and municipalities. The goal is
                               to demonstrate a programmed approach that could be integrated into a national WSS program. This approach, initiated
                               by the AWSPSA, could later provide the DWR with a clear strategy and action plan to address WSS gaps.
                               23. Project areas were selected based on an indexing exercise that scored provinces based on a prioritization
                               framework. The framework considers (i) economic and social beneﬁts, including poverty and water access levels,
                               positive externalities, and incidence of water borne diseases; (ii) susceptibility to climate hazards, such as risk of water
                               scarcity; and (iii) readiness, such as availability of Feasibility Studies (FS), province/LGU interest and support, and status
                               of permits and clearances (refer to Annex I for the selection matrix and ranking). Most of the criteria are consistent with
                               the URAF framework. Based on this prioritization, the following areas were selected for support under the WSPSA: one
                               city and seven municipalities in Bohol Province (the Loboc Cluster); seven municipalities in Siargao Island in Surigao del
                               Norte Province; and Jolo municipality in Sulu Province. Other Provinces, such as Zamboanga del Norte and Zamboanga
                               del Sur, will also beneﬁt from the preparation of FS and potential future funding. Provincial poverty levels in these
                               project areas range from 17.7 percent (Surigao del Norte) to 49 percent (Zamboanga del Norte), compared to the
                               National Capital Region (NCR) or Metro Manila, which has a poverty incidence of 5.1 percent. The islands of Bohol and
                               Siargao are experiencing water scarcity exacerbated by growing tourism and the climate impacts of extreme droughts
                               and ﬂooding. Excessive groundwater abstraction in these islands has resulted in saltwater intrusion into groundwater
                               resources, resulting in the prohibition of deep well construction in some coastal municipalities. In Jolo, water supply
                               delivery has signiﬁcantly deteriorated due to the lack of investment and ineﬃcient O&M. NRW levels are high in most

                          24
                               International Labour Organization. 2023. Technical Brief: Impact Study on Water and Gender: The Philippine Experience in Maguindanao del Sur.

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 9
                                    The World Bank
                                    Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                               areas and not properly measured in some. LGU-run WSP tariffs are also insuﬃcient to recover O&M costs, preventing
                               them from adequately maintaining their facilities, delivering consistent quality services, and expanding their services. In
                               all project areas, there is a need to break the build-neglect-rebuild cycle by ensuring the sustainability of services which
                               requires adequate tariffs to cover at least O&M costs, proper governance, improved LGU and service provider
                               capacities, as well as robust incentives and monitoring systems, among other measures.
                           Relationship to CPF
                               24. The proposed project is aligned with the World Bank Group’s 2019-2023 Country Partnership Framework (CPF,
                               Report No. 143605-PH, extended until December 2024) and the WB’s goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting
                               shared prosperity on a livable planet. The CPF aims to help overcome the core constraints to inclusive growth and
                               poverty reduction in relation to people, competition, and key vulnerabilities. In particular, the AWSPSA will contribute to
                               the following development objectives of the CPF: (6) improved eﬃciency of infrastructure services in selected areas
                               through the rehabilitation, upgrading, expansion, construction and more eﬃcient O&M of WSS systems; and (10)
                               increased resilience to natural disasters and climate change-exacerbated risks, by developing new sustainable water
                               sources and ceasing the use of depleted groundwater sources, where feasible, to stop further saltwater intrusion and
                               subsidence, which increases the ﬂood risk. The AWSPSA will also contribute to the CPF’s cross-cutting governance theme,




_For Official Use Only_
                               scaling up development impact across the Philippine archipelago by strengthening implementation capacity,
                               particularly at the local level. It will likewise strengthen the implementation capacity of selected LGUs and vertical and
                               horizontal coordination across the national government (NG) and LGUs. This is central to addressing key service delivery
                               challenges.
                               25. The project will leverage WB ﬁnancing to enable and mobilize private investment. The project is aligned with the
                               CPF’s objective of maximizing ﬁnance for development. It will support the implementation of reforms that will
                               strengthen the capacities of WSPs in building, operating, and maintaining WSS systems. The expected eﬃciency gains
                               in the WSPs’ operations will improve operational performance and creditworthiness.25 The AWSPSA may also utilize
                               private-public partnerships in providing bulk supply or FSM services, which beneﬁt from economies of scale and require
                               the technical expertise of the private sector. The AWSPSA could also be the venue for the NG to provide viability gap
                               funding (VGF) to ensure the ﬁnancial viability of projects (subject to the NG’s implementing rules). (Refer to Annex II for
                               additional details).
                               26. The proposed project will constitute Phase 1 of a horizontal Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) aimed at
                               supporting participating EAP countries to improve water security and resilience to climate risks. The MPA comprises
                               four pillars. Pillar 1 focuses on improving sustainable water and sanitation access through infrastructure and
                               interventions that promote pricing reforms, strengthen utility governance, and engage the private sector to drive
                               innovation and eﬃciency. While this pillar primarily emphasizes water supply, it also encompasses a broader range of
                               interventions related to sustainable water access across uses, reﬂecting the need for water resources to be sustainably
                               managed from people to the planet. Pillar 2 aims to boost water productivity and the quality-of-service delivery by
                               improving sector policies, governance, accountability, and demand management and encouraging private-sector
                               partnerships to ensure resilience and sustainability in water management. Pillar 3 emphasizes integrating water
                               resources management to reduce vulnerability to climate risks such as ﬂoods and droughts, protect ecosystems, and
                               foster adaptive systems to enhance community resilience. Pillar 4 focuses on strengthening institutional capacity,
                               governance, regional coordination and knowledge sharing, mobilizing new sources of ﬁnance to enhance the water


                          25
                               World Bank 2023. Scaling Up Finance for Water: A World Bank Strategic Framework and Roadmap for Action.

                                                                                                                                                      Page 10
                               The World Bank
                               Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                          sector’s ﬁnancial sustainability and resilience to climate risks. Supported under Pillar 4 by peer-to-peer learning and
                          innovation through the SWC and other organizations focused on water security and resource management, these pillars
                          aim to establish a robust framework that secures water availability and aligns with broader environmental and
                          sustainability goals, integrating water value into policies, institutions, and infrastructures for long-term impact.
                          C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

                           27. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to safely managed water supply and sanitation
                           services and improve the performance of water service providers in selected areas of the Philippines.


                          Key Results (From PCN)
                          28. Achievement of the PDO will be measured through four key results indicators:
                              a)   People provided with safely managed water (number, female, youth);
                              b)   People provided with safely managed sanitation (number, female, youth);
                              c)   WSPs that attain non-revenue water levels of at least 20 percent (number); and




_For Official Use Only_
                              d)   WSPs that have achieved at least 90 percent recovery of operations and maintenance (O&M) costs through
                                   tariffs (Number).
                          D. Concept Description
                          29. The proposed Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA) will constitute a
                          US$251.81 million Investment Project Financing (IPF) operation ﬁnanced by a US$240.66 million IBRD loan and US$11.15
                          million in counterpart funds. The project is the ﬁrst World Bank-ﬁnanced WSS project in the Philippines in 20 years and is
                          expected to serve as the basis for longer-term World Bank support to the sector. The AWSPSA will also support the
                          implementation of sector policy reforms included in the 2025 Energy Transition and Climate Resilience Development
                          Policy Loan 1 (ETCR DPL1). The project design envisages a six-year implementation period and will comprise ﬁve
                          components as follows:
                          30. Component 1. Infrastructure Investments for Safe Water Supply Services (US$193.15 million, of which US$182.38
                          million IBRD). This component will support the construction and/or rehabilitation of complete water supply systems,
                          from source development to household connections. It will comprise the following three subcomponents:
                          31. Subcomponent 1a. Water supply infrastructure investments in the Loboc Cluster in Bohol Province. This
                          subcomponent will address the water scarcity and worsening quality that is particularly felt in the Loboc Cluster by /day;
                          and (b) the rehabilitation, upgrading, and expansion of existing water distribution systems. Private capital mobilization
                          (PCM) is expected from private distribution companies that will lay pipelines to offtake bulk water for distribution in their
                          service areas. Provinces and LGUs with private water operators will enter into O&M contracts for the bulk water supply
                          system and some distribution systems. These contracts will include establishing asset maintenance funds, which need
                          to be set up by the private operators to sustain the operations of the systems; this arrangement is veriﬁed as private
                          capital enabling (PCE).
                          32. Subcomponent 1b. Water supply infrastructure investments in Siargao Island in Surigao del Norte Province. This
                          subcomponent will aim to provide a safe and reliable water supply for Siargao Island residents and tourists by developing
                          and enhancing the island’s water infrastructure. The focus will be on increasing the eﬃciencies of current water systems
                          through investments throughout 58 barangays and eight municipalities in (a) NRW reduction; and (ii) the development of


                                                                                                                                                 Page 11
                                     The World Bank
                                     Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                               new sources to meet current and future demand.
                               33. Subcomponent 1c. Water supply infrastructure investments in Jolo and adjacent barangays in two municipalities
                               in Sulu Province. This subcomponent will aim to rehabilitate and upgrade the deteriorating water supply system in the
                               project areas, currently serving only 35 percent of its original service area. Speciﬁcally, it will ﬁnance: (a) the upgrading,
                               protection, and treatment of spring sources to provide 18,000 cubic meters per day of safe and water supply up to 2040;
                               (b) replacement of the 56-kilometer water distribution network; (c) the construction of four new concrete storage tanks;
                               and (d) the installation of approximately 12,378 household connections.
                               34. Component 2. Infrastructure Investments for Safe Sanitation and WASH Services (US$11.21 million, of which
                               US$10.83 million IBRD). This Component aims to expand access to safe sanitation and inclusive WASH services through
                               investments in (a) sanitation infrastructure; and (b) the construction of WASH facilities in schools and public spaces. It will
                               comprise the following three subcomponents:
                               35. Subcomponent 2a. Sanitation and WASH in Bohol. This subcomponent will ﬁnance the construction of new (a)
                               WASH facilities in 53 public schools, 43 daycare centers, and 69 health centers26. TA under Component 3 will focus on
                               developing and implementing a regular FSM program requiring massive community and LGU engagement. TA under




_For Official Use Only_
                               Component 3 will also support the promotion of proper hygiene practices.
                               36. Subcomponent 2b. Sanitation and WASH in Siargao, Surigao del Norte. This subcomponent aims to meet the
                               island's FSM needs, given the prevalence of improperly constructed septic tanks and the absence of a sewerage system.
                               Speciﬁcally, it will ﬁnance (a) infrastructure and (b) equipment necessary to support regular septic tank emptying services
                               throughout Siargao Island.
                               37. Subcomponent 2c. Sanitation and WASH in Jolo, Sulu. This subcomponent will ﬁnance the construction of new
                               WASH facilities in 42 public schools, 8 daycare centers, and 3 social welfare centers27. TA will also be provided under
                               Component 3 to prepare the municipality for a regular septic tank emptying program and to promote proper hygiene
                               behavior and practices.
                               38. Component 3. Institutional Reforms and Capacity Building (US$15.21 million IBRD). This Component aims to
                               enhance the eﬃciency and sustainability of WSS services by supporting fundamental institutional reforms and capacity-
                               building of provinces, LGUs, and WSPs.
                               39. Component 4. Project Management and Technical Assistance (US$32.24 million IBRD). This Component will
                               ﬁnance capacity building and TA to support eﬀective project management and implementation, ensuring compliance with
                               World Bank policies while advancing long-term sanitation, water resource management, and ﬁnancing strategies. It will
                               comprise the following two subcomponents:
                               40. Subcomponent 4a Project Management. This subcomponent will ﬁnance the project management costs of the
                               two implementing agencies, the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) and the Department of the Interior
                               and Local Governments (DILG). Eligible activities will include consulting and non-consulting services, training, and relevant
                               operating expenses required to implement the project in accordance with World Bank policy and guidelines.
                               41. Subcomponent 4b. Technical Assistance (TA). This subcomponent will ﬁnance TA to enhance sustainable water
                               and sanitation management. It will support, inter alia, (a) the development of long-term master plans on sanitation


                          26
                               It bears noting that some public spaces serve as evacuation centers during typhoons and other disasters.
                          27
                               Ibid.

                                                                                                                                                        Page 12
                                The World Bank
                                Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                           and/or sewerage; (b) implementation of pilot sanitation demonstration projects; (c) implementation of an FSM
                           program;(d) sanitation and hygiene education campaigns; (e) the development of watershed management programs;
                           and (f) comprehensive water resources and energy assessments, among others. This subcomponent is a veriﬁed MFD-e.
                           This will come from conducting feasibility studies such as a water revolving fund for creditworthy Water Districts, other
                           credit enhancements, and PPP arrangements in close coordination with IFC and MIGA (refer to Annex II for additional
                           details).
                           42. Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (US$0 million). This zero-cost component will allow
                           the GoP to quickly access project funds in response to an eligible disaster, emergency, or crisis. It will enable rapid
                           reallocation of uncommitted project funds to address urgent needs during a natural disaster or crisis (including public
                           health-related emergencies). A declaration of a state of calamity by a qualiﬁed national or subnational authority, under
                           applicable laws, could serve as a trigger to activate this component. The CERC Annex in the POM will consider climate
                           risks on both mitigation and adaptation.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
                          Legal Operational Policies




_For Official Use Only_
                                               Policies                                                     Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No



                           Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                           43. Since, the project area and its proposed interventions are not known for other phases of the MPA, this section only
                           discusses risks related to Phase 1 of the program. The risks in other phases will be assessed when the scope of the MPA
                           is identified. The Philippines phase of the MPA envisages developing water sources, upgrading/constructing water
                           transmission and distribution systems and the provision of sanitation facilities (septage treatment, WASH in schools and
                           public areas). While the operational phase of the project would have several benefits, anticipated environmental
                           impacts and risks of the project include: (a) possible impacts on natural habitats in case of new surface source
                           development or land subsidence or saline water intrusion due to over extraction of groundwater; (b) cumulative impacts
                           of water use on communities; (c) competing water demand and riparian issues;(d) source contamination due to
                           construction activities affecting health and safety of downstream riparians; (e) possible forest land diversion and impacts
                           on bio-diversity for laying transmission mains or construction of storage reservoirs at elevation; (f) OHS risks on
                           communities during construction of distribution network; (g) air/water/soil pollution due to the civil works including
                           debris disposal; (h) impacts due to sighting of septage treatment facilities and operation stage impacts such as odor and
                           quality of effluents; and (i) contamination of ground and/or surface water due to improperly designed facilities, etc.
                           During the implementation of similar past civil works in these provinces, mitigation measures for most of these impacts
                           were integrated into the construction contracts. In addition, DPWH has demonstrated capacity to manage and address
                           such impacts. However, the civil works in or around the protected areas and/or near pristine water sources could cause
                           significant impacts. Considering this, the environmental risk is rated as “Substantial” at PCN.


                                                                                                                                                 Page 13
                               The World Bank
                               Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                          44. The project will have significant positive impact for poor and vulnerable households and communities by providing
                          access to affordable and clean water supply and sanitation facilities. Increased access to water would positively impact
                          women and girls increasing time for productive activities, providing safe and sanitary sanitation facilities. Given the
                          nature and context of the project, which is water provision and civil works, key identified risks include (a) land acquisition
                          and road right of way for the siting of the facilities such as bulk water supply reservoirs, treatment plant, intake tanks,
                          as well as laying of pipes, which may involve servitude/ easement restrictions (b) community health and safety due to
                          potential increase of waste water, water contamination and disruption of services during civil works, and traffic risks
                          due to use of heavy equipment and excavation works during pipe laying, (c) equity issues in the use of water resources
                          or restrictions on benefitting from ecosystem services especially for communities where the water is sourced, and (d)
                          potential impacts on IP communities in Bohol and Sulu. Labor influx and its impact on workers and communities are not
                          expected as per DPWH experience, between 40-60 workers per site are needed with 80 percent of the laborers sourced
                          from the community or locality. Workers camps will be set-up hosting 5-10 workers. Occupational health and safety
                          issues include security of workers, exposure to natural hazards such as floods and extreme weather events (heavy
                          rainfall and extreme heat). Inclusion of vulnerable and marginalized groups is crucial. The project will need to take into
                          consideration universal access principles in the design of WASH facilities to cater to the specific needs of persons with
                          limited mobility and gender considerations. Capacity building activities will need to ensure that women and IPs are
                          provided spaces and opportunities to participate and lead.




_For Official Use Only_
                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                          CONTACT POINT

                          World Bank
                           Ma Fiorella Delos Reyes Fabella
                           Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                           Aude-Sophie Rodella
                           Lead Water Economist

                           Midori Makino
                           Lead Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist, Program Leader

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Department of Finance
                           Joven Balbosa
                           Undersecretary for the International Finance Group
                           jzbalbosa@dof.gov.ph

                          Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                                                                  Page 14
                               The World Bank
                               Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (P510359)


                           Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)
                           Emil Sadain
                           Senior Undersecretary for Unified Project Management Office
                           sadainekmail@yahoo.com

                           Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG)
                           Marlo Iringan
                           Undersecretary for Local Government
                           mliringan@dilg.gov.ph

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000




_For Official Use Only_
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                     Ma Fiorella Delos Reyes Fabella, Aude-Sophie Rodella, Midori Makino

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:                Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo        11-Apr-2025

                          Country Director:                        Cevdet Cagdas Unal                     05-Jun-2025




                                                                                                                                         Page 15
