Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 01/28/2026 | Report No: ESRSA04362




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 02, 2026                                                                                        Page 1 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510359                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       EAP Water MPA                2026

                     Operation Name            Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA)

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Philippines               Philippines                              EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC        Water


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of the           Department of Public Works and           05-Nov-2025                  30-Mar-2026
                     Philippines               Highways (DPWH), Department of the
                                               Interior and Local Government (DILG)

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost




Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     17-Jun-2025               268,847,359.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To increase access to safely managed water supply and sanitation services and improve the performance of water
                     service providers in selected areas of the Philippines.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The operation is a multi-phase program approach (MPA) whose development objective is to support participating EAP
                     countries in improving their water security and resilience to climate risks. Phase 1 of the MPA includes the Philippines
                     Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA). The project development objectives, results
                     indicators, and activities are aligned with those of the MPA and will contribute to the expected outcomes under the
                     MPA. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is “to increase access to safely managed water supply and
                     sanitation services and improve the performance of water service providers in selected areas of the Philippines.”


                    Feb 02, 2026                                                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                     Component 1. Infrastructure Investments for Safe, Climate Resilient Water Supply Services (US$213.30 million, of which
                     US$197.55 million IBRD). This Component aims to increase access to safely managed water supply services through
                     infrastructure projects, including construction and/or rehabilitation of complete water supply systems, from source
                     development to household connections. Subcomponent 1a. Water supply infrastructure investments in the Loboc
                     Cluster in Bohol Province This subcomponent will address the water scarcity and worsening quality that is particularly
                     felt in the Loboc Cluster. Specifically, it will support (a) the development of a bulk water supply system sourced from the
                     Loboc River with a capacity of 60,000 cubic meters/day; and (b) the rehabilitation, upgrading, and expansion of existing
                     water distribution systems in 1 city and 7 municipalities. Subcomponent 1b. Water supply infrastructure investments in
                     Siargao Island in Surigao del Norte Province This subcomponent will aim to provide safe and reliable water supply for
                     Siargao Island residents and tourists by developing and enhancing the island’s water infrastructure. The focus will be on
                     increasing the efficiencies of current water systems through NRW reduction and developing new sources to meet
                     current and future demand. It will support 58 barangays in eight municipalities. Subcomponent 1c. Water supply
                     infrastructure investments in Jolo and adjacent barangays in two municipalities in Sulu Province This subcomponent will
                     aim to rehabilitate and upgrade the entire water supply system in the project areas, which are dilapidated and service
                     only 35 percent of the original service area. The objective is to enhance water services' reliability, safety, and resilience
                     to meet current and future water demand. To this end, this subcomponent will support: (a) upgrading, protecting, and
                     treating spring sources to provide 18,000 cubic meters per day of reliable and safe water supply up to 2040; (b) total
                     replacement of the 56-kilometer water distribution network; (c) construction of four new concrete storage tanks; and
                     (d) installation of around 12,378 household connections Component 2. Infrastructure Investments for Safe, Climate
                     Resilient Sanitation and WASH Services in Institutions (US$12.90 million, of which US$12.32 million IBRD). This
                     Component aims to expand access to safe sanitation and inclusive WASH services through investments in sanitation




Public Disclosure
                     infrastructure such as for fecal sludge management (FSM) and the construction of WASH facilities in schools and public
                     spaces. Subcomponent 2a. Sanitation and WASH in Bohol. This subcomponent will finance the construction of new
                     WASH facilities in 53 public schools, 43 daycare centers, and 69 health centers, some of which also function as
                     evacuation centers during typhoons and other disasters. Related to sanitation, one FSM plant in Bohol is operating but
                     underutilized and another one is planned; their total capacities are sufficient to address the FSM needs of the three
                     most urbanized and populated city/municipalities – Tagbilaran City, Dauis, and Panglao. A TA under Component 4 will
                     be provided to complement this infrastructure. This TA will focus on developing and implementing a regular FSM
                     program requiring massive community and LGU engagement. The TA will also promote proper hygiene practices.
                     Subcomponent 2b. Sanitation and WASH in Siargao, Surigao del Norte This subcomponent aims to meet the island's
                     FSM needs, given the prevalence of improperly constructed septic tanks and the absence of a sewerage system. The
                     infrastructure and equipment to be constructed will support regular septic tank emptying services throughout Siargao
                     Island. WASH facilities will also be constructed in schools and other institutions. Subcomponent 2c. Sanitation and
                     WASH in Jolo, Sulu This subcomponent will finance the construction of new WASH facilities in 42 public schools, 8
                     daycare centers, and 3 social welfare centers, some of which also function as evacuation centers during typhoons and
                     other disasters. A TA will also be provided under Component 4 to prepare the municipality for a regular septic tank
                     emptying program and promote proper hygiene behavior and practices. Component 3. Institutional Reforms and
                     Capacity Building (US$13.44 million IBRD). This Component aims to enhance the efficiency and sustainability of WSS
                     services by supporting fundamental institutional reforms and capacity-building of provinces, LGUs, and WSPs. The WSPs
                     will benefit from onsite practical trainings on leadership and governance, technical and commercial operations, financial
                     management, and project management. It also includes project management costs of DILG. Component 4. Project
                     Management and Technical Assistance (US$28.58 million IBRD, of which US$27.58 million IBRD). This Component will
                     support effective project implementation through support to project management and technical assistance, ensuring


                    Feb 02, 2026                                                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                     compliance with World Bank policies while advancing long-term sanitation, water resource management, and financing
                     strategies. Subcomponent 4a Project Management This subcomponent will finance project management costs for the
                     DPWH. Eligible activities will include consulting and non-consulting services, training, and relevant operating expenses
                     required to implement the project following the World Bank policy and guidelines. Subcomponent 4b. Technical
                     Assistance (TA). This subcomponent will finance TA aimed at enhancing sustainable water and sanitation management.
                     TA under this component will include consulting work that will support, among others, the development of long-term
                     master plans on sanitation and/or sewerage; implementation of pilot sanitation demonstration projects;
                     implementation of an FSM program; conduct of education campaigns on sanitation and hygiene; development and
                     implementation of watershed management programs; comprehensive water resources and energy assessments; and
                     other related work in the project areas. Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (US$0 million). This
                     zero-cost component will allow the GoP to quickly access project funds in response to an eligible disaster, emergency, or
                     crisis. It will enable rapid reallocation of uncommitted project funds to address urgent needs during a natural disaster or
                     crisis (including public health-related emergencies). A declaration of a state of calamity by a qualified national or
                     subnational authority, under applicable laws, could serve as a possible trigger to activate this component.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project in Philippines is first phase of the proposed Multi Phase Approach (MPA), that aims to improve water
                     security and resilience to climate risks in EAP region. The subsequent phases of MPA are planned to be implemented in
                     Thailand, Mongolia, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea in a sequential and simultaneous manner over a period next 10
                     years. The project area and proposed interventions in these countries are unknown at this stage.



Public Disclosure
                     The Philippines phase of the project is proposed to be implemented in Loboc cluster in Bohol province, Siargao island in
                     Surigao del Norte Province and municipality of Jolo in Sulu Province. In terms of the activities, the project involves the
                     development of water sources, construction and upgrading of water transmission and distribution systems, as well as
                     construction of sanitation facilities such as septage treatment and WASH installations in schools and public areas. While
                     these investments—like intake wells, transmission mains, and treatment facilities—offer long-term benefits, the
                     construction and operational phases could cause some social and environmental risks.

                     The project will be socially significant as it increases water and sanitation services which leads to better human and
                     economic development outcomes. While Philippines is not categorized as an FCV country, sub-regional conflict exists in
                     some areas of Mindanao- Surigao and Sulu have conflict-affectations such as New People's Army of the Communist
                     Party of the Philippines (CPP-NPA) in Surigao del Norte), some elements of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and Moro
                     National Liberation Front and some terrorist groups in Sulu.

                     Regarding environmental settings, the project provinces have several natural features with ecological importance. Bohol
                     is renowned for its coral reefs and unique geological formations, such as Chocolate Hills in Carmen, featuring over 1,200
                     symmetrical mounds that turn cocoa-brown in the dry season. The province is also home to Tarsier sanctuary, a large
                     forest area dedicated to protecting the endangered tarsiers, small nocturnal primates. Siargao, known as the surfing
                     capital of the Philippines, boasts long sandy beaches, natural caves, and impressive rock formations. Sulu does not have
                     any officially designated protected areas while it has started its campaign on eco-tourism for the province. These
                     aspects have been considered in siting various facilities and scope of the project activities.


                    Feb 02, 2026                                                                                                     Page 4 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) in the Philippines is the primary implementing agency for the
                     project and has substantial knowledge and experience with the World Bank's Environmental and Social Framework
                     (ESF). DPWH has a proven track record and is currently implementing World Bank-financed projects, such as the Metro
                     Manila Flood Management Project, the Philippines Seismic Risk Reduction and Resilience Project, Infrastructure for
                     Safer and Resilient Schools and the Mindanao Transport Connectivity Improvement Project. These projects demonstrate
                     DPWH's expertise in managing various types of investment activities and managing ESF risks/ impacts. The department's
                     Environment and Social Safeguards Department (ESSD) ensures compliance with safeguards requirements through
                     diligent implementation, review, and reporting processes. Operating under a comprehensive Social and Environment
                     Management System (SEMS), the ESSD provides the foundation for understanding and applying safeguards principles
                     and executing the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).

                     The Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) serves as the other project implementing agency for the
                     project and its environmental and social (E&S) capacity has significantly improved since the beginning of the project
                     preparation. This improvement is attributed to a series of capacity development activities, including orientation
                     sessions, write-shops, and close hand-holding carried out by the team in preparing ES instruments for the project. It is
                     also important to note that, DILG's role in the project will be on capacity building of local government units (LGUs) and
                     supporting policy-making related to water supply and sanitation. Hence, the nature and level of ESF capacity required at
                     DILG different as compared to DPWH. Thus, continued guidance and support from the task team would be required to
                     sustain the gains achieved in terms of ESF capacity.




Public Disclosure
                     Following adaptive risk management approach, the team will assess the capacity of borrowers (DPWH and DILG) on an
                     ongoing basis during the implementation phase of the project to ensure preparedness in managing environmental and
                     social risks in alignment with the World Bank's ESF and implement necessary measures.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     Since, the project areas and its proposed interventions are not known for other phases (and countries) of the MPA
                     program, this section of the ESRS discusses risks related to Philippines Phase of the project only. The risks in other
                     phases will be assessed as and when the next phase of the program is defined and identified. The Philippines phase of
                     the MPA, envisages developing water sources, upgrading/constructing water transmission and distribution systems
                     and provision of sanitation facilities (septage treatment, WASH in schools and public areas) in Loboc cluster of Bohol
                     province, Siargao island in Surigao del Norte Province and municipality of Jolo in Sulu Province . While the operational
                     phase of the project would have several benefits, based on the feasibility studies available at this stage and initial
                     environmental assessment of these interventions, the anticipated environmental impacts and risks of the project
                     include: (a) loss of vegetation due to tree cutting; (b) source contamination due to construction activities affecting
                     health and safety of downstream riparians; (c) forest land diversion for laying transmission mains, construction of
                     storage reservoirs; (d) OHS risks on communities during construction of distribution network; (e) air/water/soil
                     pollution due to the civil works including debris disposal; (f) impacts due to sighting of septage treatment facilities and


                    Feb 02, 2026                                                                                                       Page 5 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                     operation stage impacts such as odor and quality of effluents; and (g) contamination of ground and/or surface water
                     due to improperly designed facilities, etc. Considering the presence of Protected Areas (PA) in the project provinces,
                     impacts on local biodiversity are also expected. These impacts based on the initial assessments are not expected to be
                     significant, but need detailed assessment to confirm the nature and significance of these impacts. This assessment
                     shall be carried out once the exact location and design of the interventions are finalized during the implementation
                     phase. Accordingly, the ESMF and the initial assessments carried out by the implementing agencies outlines the
                     measures and factors to be considered during the detailed phase of the project, a broad ESMP and highlights the
                     need for obtaining relevant regulatory clearances from local authorities before the commencement of works. During
                     the implementation similar civil works in the past in these provinces, mitigation measures for most of these impacts
                     were integrated into the construction contracts. In addition, DPWH has demonstrated capacity to manage and
                     address such impacts. Considering these factors, the environmental risk of the project is rated as “Substantial” at
                     PCN.
                                                                                                                                  Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project will have significant positive impact for poor and vulnerable households and communities by providing
                     access to affordable and clean water supply and sanitation facilities. Increased access to water would positively
                     impact women and girls increasing time for productive activities, providing safe and sanitary sanitation facilities.
                     Given the nature and context of the project which is water provision and civil works, key identified risks include (i)
                     land acquisition and road right of way for the siting of the facilities such as bulk water supply reservoirs, treatment
                     plant, intake tanks, as well as laying of pipes, which may involve servitude/ easement restrictions (ii) community
                     health and safety due to potential increase of wastewater, water contamination and disruption of services during civil




Public Disclosure
                     works, and traffic risks due to use of heavy equipment and excavation works during pipe laying, (iii) equity issues in
                     the use of water resources or restrictions on benefitting from ecosystem services especially for communities where
                     the water is sourced, and (iv) maintenance and water quality issues. Labor influx and its impact on workers and
                     communities are not expected as per DPWH experience, between 40-60 workers per site is needed with 80 percent of
                     the laborers sourced from the community or locality. Workers camp will be set-up hosting 5-10 workers. Occupational
                     health and safety issues include security of workers, exposure to natural hazards such as floods and extreme weather
                     events (heavy rainfall and extreme heat). Issues on road right of way and temporary resettlement/relocation is
                     foreseen especially in the distribution line civil works. This may lead to temporary displacement of vendors and road
                     access issues for private households and business establishments. Minimal land acquisition is foreseen for the siting
                     of pumping stations and bulk water supply reservoirs as most of these lands are owned by the local government units.
                     Inclusion of vulnerable and marginalized groups is crucial, the Project will need to take into consideration universal
                     access principles in the design of WASH facilities to cater to the specific needs of persons with limited mobility and
                     gender considerations. Capacity building activities will need to ensure that women and IPs are provided spaces and
                     opportunities to participate and lead.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                               Relevant




                    Feb 02, 2026                                                                                                    Page 6 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                      ESS 1 is relevant to the project. Feasibility reports and initial ESIAs have been prepared by DPWH, DILG and provincial
                      local governments. However, the detailed design of various interventions such as intake structure, water treatment
                      plant, transmission lines, etc. will be finalized only during implementation. Hence, the implementing agencies have
                      prepared the ESMF and ESCP that guides in addressing ESF risks during detailed design and implementation phase.
                      The ESMF outlines screening criteria and guidance for preparing site specific detailed ESIAs and ESMPs for the sub-
                      projects. The ESMF also includes Generic ESMP based on the information available from the feasibility studies, an
                      exclusion list, Environmental and Social Codes of Practice (ESCOPs) and nature based solutions to mitigate the
                      impacts; Labor Management Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework. The ESMF also includes M&E mechanisms to
                      capture lessons learned in the first phase of the MPA, so that these can be integrated in the next phases of the MPA.
                      These instruments were also informed by the stakeholder consultations conducted by DPWH and DILG during March
                      26-27, 2025.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      ESS 10 is relevant. Affected parties include communities where the water supply is sourced, adjacent communities
                      (including downstream) and private companies benefitting from ecosystem services, local government units and their
                      water utilities offices, and households, public institutions and private businesses that will be affected by the civil
                      works. Vulnerable and disadvantaged groups comprise children, persons with disabilities (PWDs), and IPs. A project-
                      wide SEP has been prepared, the SEP outline activities on the conduct of public dialogues, and includes a grievance
                      redress mechanism (GRM). Consultations were also conducted from March 2025 to October 2025 with key
                      stakeholders including, national, local officials and community-level stakeholder. The results of these consultations
                      are reflected in the the ESMF and SEP instruments that were disclosed on the DPWH and DILG websites on March 19,



Public Disclosure
                      2025 (first disclosure) and December 6, 2025.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      ESS 2 is relevant. According to DPWH the Project will employ between 40-60 laborers, 80-85 percent of whom will be
                      recruited from local communities. Thus, no labor influx is expected, however, a small workers camp ("Bunk houses")
                      will still be needed to accommodate the remaining 15 percent of skilled workers. It is anticipated that the majority
                      will fall under contracted workers, some direct workers, and some primary supply workers. Child labor is a potential
                      risk for this project especially in rural communities and can be used as haulers of construction materials. The Labor
                      Management Procedure has been prepared as part of the ESMF. The LMP adopts the Labor Code of the Philippines
                      and other relevant labor policy it outlines the policies and procedures on OHS, labor GRM, working conditions and
                      prevention of child labor, forced labor, SEAH/SH and GBV. For areas with potential active conflict, a security
                      management plan will be prepared before project implementation.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant as the project may generate significant risks associated with the civil works that generates noise, dust
                      and emissions and also issues of water pollution during operation phase. The ESMF thus focuses on pollution
                      prevention, and waste management with screening addressing the risks on pollutant release, waste generation, ACM,
                      community impact, and measures for improving efficient consumption of energy, water and raw materials, as well as
                      other resources. Potential restrictions to key ecosystem services like access to water for livelihood and cultural
                      aspects is also possible. While the ESMF includes broader mitigation measure, specific measures will be identified by


                    Feb 02, 2026                                                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                      the detailed ESIA to be carried out during the implementation phase once the detailed design of sub-project is
                      available, the ESIA/ESMP will also evaluate civil works' risks and mitigation measures in line with ESS3 requirements,
                      including raw materials, water use, air pollution, hazardous materials, and waste. Depending on the detailed designs
                      and capacities, the significance and need for GHG accounting will also be considered. The technical design will
                      incorporate good practices to reduce or mitigate the emission of greenhouse gases.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS 4 is relevant. Civil works involving water systems and distribution lines/pipes pose significant health and safety
                      risks to communities. Foremost to this is the disruption of water supply and possible contamination of water brought
                      about by the civil works. Construction and excavation activities also present safety risks to communities including
                      traffic accidents, air/noise/water pollution. Increasing water access also translates to an increase of waste water and
                      sanitation issues demanding safe sewage and septage management. A traffic management plan will be prepared after
                      the detailed designs are finalized as part of the ESMP. Moderate GBV and SEAH/SH risks stem from presence of male
                      workers in rural and isolated communities and select-schools. GBV and SEA/SH orientation among workers is included
                      in the LMP, while community-level mechanisms shall be tapped by the project to mitigate this risk. The project shall
                      apply universal access and design principles, in a manner financially and technically feasible.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      ESS 5 is relevant. Land acquisition is envisaged to be undertaken by local government units (LGUs e.g. municipal and
                      or provincial). During visits, observations include majority of lands to be used by the project are owned by the LGUs,




Public Disclosure
                      informal settlers and or holder's of temporary use of rights are also present and will likely to be affected. In addition,
                      land acquisition for the approach roads of various water facilities is also possible. Pipe laying works may also impact
                      households, schools and business establishment including vendors. With this, the Borrower has prepared a
                      Resettlement Policy Framework as part of the ESMF to guide LGUs in preparing and implementing site specific
                      Resettlement Action Plan prior to the initiation of sub-project activities. RAPs will cover land acquisition, resettlement
                      and economic displacement and a GRM. If temporary displacement of street vendors is unavoidable, the requirement
                      under ESS5 is to consult the affected parties and come up with alternative locations or livelihood support. During the
                      March 27-28, 2025 workshop attended by the provincial and municipal government officials of the affected local
                      government units (LGUs), an orientation on ESS5 was conducted to provide additional information and guide LGUs on
                      land acquisition and resettlement standards. The LGUs are finalizing their baseline studies to inform the extent of any
                      potential land acquisition and resettlement impact to households and business establishments affected by the
                      project. This baseline studies will inform the RAPs that they will be developing prior to the implementation. Lastly, a
                      training for LGU E&S focal persons is scheduled this March 24 - 28, 2026 to capacitate LGUs in preparing their
                      respective RAPs.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      Some of the project interventions are located close to the Protected Areas (PA) of ecological significance and some
                      civil works may be located in these areas. Hence, impacts on terrestrial and/or aquatic ecosystems is anticipated.
                      IBAT screening reflects about 23 PAs and 9 key biodiversity areas (KBA) of terrestrial ecology in the project area. ESS6
                      hence is relevant for the project and exclusion criteria has been included in the ESMF. Based on the available


                    Feb 02, 2026                                                                                                       Page 8 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                      information and initial screening, some project areas are close to PAs, requiring Protected Area Management Board
                      (PAMB) clearance. The detailed design of sub-projects during implementation of the project will evaluate these
                      aspects, especially for source development and alignment of water transmission mains. Given this, the bio-diversity
                      aspects and the associated impacts will be assessed as part of the E&S Screening and ESIAs for specific investments
                      including impacts on biodiversity, habitat fragmentation, water quality degradation, erosion, deforestation, etc.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      As per site visits and consultations conducted, no IP ancestral domains nor communities with majority IP population
                      will be affected. However, it is worth noting that IP households are present in some of the communities in Bohol,
                      Siargao and Sulu. With this, SEP and GRM mechanisms have outlines IP-sensitive approaches to enable inclusion and
                      meaningful participation of the IP households and individuals in the project. The SEP outlines strategies for their
                      meaningful participation . Equity issues over access to water resources and WASH facilities are considered in the
                      Project's design and strategy ensuring that IP communities have continuous access to the different ecosystem
                      services derived from the water resources as well as access to potable water services and WASH facilities. Further
                      consultations with the IP communities in Bohol and Sulu will be undertaken during the detailed design of sub-project
                      phase to ensure their needs and views are considered and integrated in the design of the project.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. During the field visits and consultations conducted the project as the potential to adversely




Public Disclosure
                      impact tangible cultural heritage especially in Bohol where heritage churches are found. As an example, the church in
                      Dauis, Bohol has been identified may be impacted with the excavation works due to the distribution lines. As such
                      ,the ESMF outlines key safeguards activities in order to avoid, minimize and mitigate any impact of the project to such
                      tangible heritage infrastructures. This include among others re-routing distribution supply lines, and closely
                      coordinating with local and national historical and cultural offices for the preservation of cultural buildings. Since civil
                      works may involve substantial soil excavation, the ESCP and ESMF includes the preparation of chance-find
                      procedures.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                     Not Currently Relevant

                      Based on the current project design ESS 9 is currently not relevant for the project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                             No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                      No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            In Part




                    Feb 02, 2026                                                                                                         Page 9 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)



                       The Philippine environmental policies such as environmental certification/ clearance for sub-projects, application of
                       labor policies, GBV and SEA/SH laws will be applicable for the Philippines phase of the MPA. Application of BF for
                       other phases of the MPA will be assessed on a case to basis for the respective country (Thailand, Mongolia, Indonesia,
                       PNG) and depending on the scope and nature of the activities proposed.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       Common approach will not be adopted for the project.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     Considering the fact that only feasibility reports have ben prepared for the project, the following ESF developed to
                     ensure compliance to the ESF requirements.

                     -ESCP, ESMF (with LMP, RPF and ESMP template) integrated in the instrument.
                     - Initial ESIAs based on feasibility reports to meet government's project preparation requirements. These shall be
                     revised/ updated once the detailed designs are finalized during project implementation and submitted for Bank's
                     clearance.
                     -SEP (with GRM)
                     -Conducted stakeholder consultations during March 27 - 28, 2025



Public Disclosure
                     -Disclosed ESCP, ESMF, LARF, LMP and SEP on March 4 and March 19, 2025 (first draft disclosure) and December 6,
                     2025, 2nd draft disclosure.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Ma Fiorella Delos Reyes Fabella        Title:          Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  mfabella@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Aude-Sophie Rodella                    Job Title:      Lead Water Economist

                      Email:                  arodella@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Midori Makino                          Job Title:      Lead Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  Mmakino@worldbank.org




                    Feb 02, 2026                                                                                                   Page 10 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Philippines Accelerated Water And Sanitation Project In Selected Areas (awspsa) (P510359)




                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                  Ma Fiorella Delos Reyes Fabella, Aude-Sophie Rodella, Midori Makino

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:         Harinath A. S.

                     ADM Social Specialist:                Paul Tudtud Adolfo




Public Disclosure




                    Feb 02, 2026                                                                                                 Page 11 of 11
