Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 16-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDPA00219




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                     Operation ID               Operation Name
                                                                                     Second Community Action
                               EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                  for Landscape
Ethiopia                                                  P510697
                               AFRICA                                                Management Program for
                                                                                     Results
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date    Practice Area (Lead)
                                                                                     Environment, Natural
Program-for-Results
                               09-Feb-2026                07-Jul-2026                Resources & the Blue
Financing (PforR)
                                                                                     Economy
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
the Federal Democratic
                               Ministry of Agriculture
Republic of Ethiopia

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to expand area under sustainable land management practices, secure
land tenure and increase market linkages in highland areas.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           No

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                              1,750.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                 1,029.65
    Total Program Cost                                                                                1,001.80
    IPF Component                                                                                         27.85
  Total Financing                                                                                      1,029.65

  Financing Gap                                                                                             0.00



                                                                                                             Page 1



                                                                                                     Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


FINANCING
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                             200.00
   World Bank Lending                                                                                          200.00
  Total Government Contribution                                                                                788.30

  Total Non-World Bank Group Financing                                                                           41.35
   Trust Funds                                                                                                  41.35

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
Decision
Other




B. Introduction and Context

Program Strategic Context

1. The proposed Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (CALM 2) supports the
   Government of Ethiopia’s long-term landscape restoration agenda under the National Strategic Investment
   Framework for Sustainable Landscape Management (ESIF 2, 2024–2038). Land degradation remains a major
   challenge, costing an estimated 2–3 percent of agricultural GDP annually. Building on the Government’s Sustainable
   Land Management Program (SLMP) platform that has been in place since 2008, CALM 2 will expand geographic
   coverage, introduce additional forms of support, and increase the number of beneficiaries to accelerate delivery of
   ESIF 2 priorities.
2. CALM 2 champions the priorities of the Global Challenge Program on Forests and the 'Livable Planet' Scorecard,
   by supporting efforts that enhance resilience, create more and better jobs, strengthen food security, improve land
   management, and reduce GHG emissions. Building on collaboration with IFC, it advances the WBG's AgriConnect
   initiative by: (i) supporting smallholders' access to inputs that will improve productivity and incomes; (ii)
   strengthening government policies that seek to attract private sector investment into agriculture, and (iii) expanding
   access to finance for, and participation in, agri-value chains.
3. Addressing the drivers of land degradation will improve agricultural productivity, create jobs and raise rural
   incomes. Improving tenure security will increase smallholders’ incentives to adopt sustainable land management
   practices and help reduce local conflicts over land rights and access to resources. To maximize impact, as well as
   reduce reliance on public finance, the Program aims to leverage private sector finance.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

4. Land degradation in Ethiopia hampers rural growth and poverty reduction at a significant scale, with 80 percent of
   the Ethiopia’s land prone to moderate or severe soil degradation. Approximately 27 million hectares have
   experienced significant erosion, impacting 20 percent of Ethiopia’s population, while more than 2 million hectares

                                                                                                                    Page 2



                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


    are considered beyond the scope of economic reclamation. Barriers to adoption of soil and water conservation
    practices include land tenure insecurity, insufficient technical support, poor community involvement, and weak links
    between research and extension service providers.
5. Forest cover loss and degradation accelerate the rate of landscape degradation. An FAO study covering the period
   from 2000 to 2012, found that Ethiopia experienced a net forest loss of 72,000 ha annually, losing 92,000 ha of its
   forest each year due to deforestation, against 20,000 ha of reforestation and afforestation. Forest loss is a product
   of a combination of factors that include farmland expansion, the high dependency on biomass energy, illegal logging,
   open grazing systems, forest fires. Increased vulnerability to effects of climate change, widespread poverty and a
   scarcity of alternative means for livelihoods exacerbate these problems.
6. Climate change threatens Ethiopia’s development by worsening land degradation and food insecurity. GoE’s
   Sustainable Landscape Management (SLsM) approach, consistent with CALM 2, is a holistic approach to managing
   land and natural resources that integrates conservation, responsible land use, and community engagement to
   balance environmental health, economic viability, and social equity, ensuring resilient, biodiverse landscapes that
   support livelihoods, minimize environmental impact, and adapt to climate change for the benefit of future
   generations. With increasing rainfall variability, scaling up SLsM is crucial, as it reduces runoff, boosts infiltration,
   improves soil health and enhances farmer productivity and resilience while also creating opportunities for farmers to
   increase their incomes from a broader range of value chains. The World Bank’s Country Climate and Development
   Report (CCDR) for Ethiopia highlights that investing in SLsM will provide significant development and adaptation
   benefits, especially when focused on areas with the highest potential to improve ecosystem services like erosion
   control, managing acid soils water regulation, and carbon storage.
7. SLsM has contributed to increased employment opportunities in agriculture and related sectors by catalyzing job
   creation through enhanced agricultural productivity, diversification of income sources, and improved land quality.
   Additionally, SLsM supports agribusiness value chain development by improving produce quality and market access
   leading to employment in production, processing, and distribution. Positive externalities, such as improved water
   management in upstream watersheds, benefit downstream users and protect jobs in water-dependent sectors.
8. To date, approximately 4.8 million hectares of degraded land have been restored under the GoE’s SLMP, including
   the Bank-supported Climate Action through Landscape Management Program for Results (CALM, P170384) and the
   Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods Project (RLLP, P163383) and the Second Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods
   Project (RLLP-II, P174385), providing a strong foundation for Ethiopia to generate and monetize emission
   reductions. Building on these achievements, the proposed CALM 2 will strengthen the country’s capacity to access
   and effectively utilize carbon finance mechanisms, enhancing its ability to participate in carbon markets and trade
   emission reductions from agriculture, forestry, and other land uses (AFOLU).
9. Ethiopia has strengthened efforts to reduce deforestation through community participation and reforestation
   programs. Participatory Forest Management (PFM) engages local communities in forest conservation, supported by
   afforestation and reforestation initiatives such as enrichment planting and new woodlot development. In recent
   years, these measures have reduced net forest loss to 28,000 hectares per year.
10. The National Rural Land Administration Information System (NRLAIS), intended to ensure all land tenure
    information is collected and stored safely and updated regularly, is operational but requires further strengthening.
    It is essential to increase the number of Land Administration offices at woreda level connected to the national digital
    infrastructure. Woredas with watersheds that have implemented SLsM practices with support from investment
    project financing, but where land registration and certification efforts have not been completed will be prioritized.
    CALM 2 will seek to expand secure land rights by completing land registration and certification for all highland
    woredas, including communal tenure rights on forested and grazing lands.


                                                                                                                       Page 3



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


    11. Community cooperatives play a vital role in promoting SLsM at the local level, but their continued reliance on
        development partner financed interventions limits long-term sustainability. To address this situation, the proposed
        Program aims to strengthen private sector linkages with smallholders, create new economic opportunities, expand
        market participation, and improve access to sustainable finance. By connecting smallholders to diverse agricultural
        value chains, facilitating access to credit, and promoting participation in payments for ecosystem services (PES) and
        emerging carbon markets, the Program will help diversify income sources and enhance resilience. Already,
        smallholders have leveraged their land certificates to secure over US$100 million in small loans1, demonstrating the
        potential for scaling up these efforts.
    CALM 2 will amplify previous achievements including those of CALM (P170384), the on-going Program for Results
       operation, making one of Africa's largest landscape restoration and land tenure security initiatives even bigger.
       Taken together, past and on-going interventions have benefited over 11 million individuals and cover 4.8M hectares,
       700 highland woredas, 8,000 watersheds. These interventions have delivered annual reductions of 3.3 million tons of
       CO₂e through forest protection, climate-smart agriculture, soil and water conservation, and 80,000 hectares of tree
       planting, resulting in a 9 percent increase in vegetation cover. Land rights have also been strengthened, with 9.5
       million households receiving certificates (with 80 percent of households including women) and 34,000 landless youth
       obtaining legal recognized land use rights. To sustain these results and momentum beyond development partner
       interventions, CALM 2 will enhance private sector engagement and the provision of private sector finance.
    12. CALM 2 introduces targeted innovations to enhance sustainability, market linkages, and institutional effectiveness.
        New design elements include: (i) linking smallholders to value chains to boost incomes while providing enhanced
        support for long-term soil health improvement2; (ii) restoring and strengthening communal land tenure, including
        forests and grazing lands; (iii) incentivizing private sector finance flows to rural communities by strengthening
        agribusiness value chains and fostering payments for ecosystem services; (iv) improving the ability to effectively
        leverage carbon finance activities and trade emission reductions from agriculture, forestry and other land uses
        (AFOLU); (v) improved targeting of interventions using the Investment Prioritization Tool (IPT) as an input to decision
        making while shifting to a more systematic treatment of fewer but larger watersheds; (vi) strengthening linkages with
        public works supported under social protection programs, so that, where appropriate, these contribute to the
        implementation of community watershed management plans; and (vii) enhancing local–level capacity for monitoring,
        financial management (FM), environmental and social risk management, and communications.
    13. CALM 2 will support the Ministry of Agriculture’s (MoA’s) efforts to address critical aspects of SLM previously
        underemphasized in the earlier Ethiopian Sustainable Land Management Investment Framework (ESIF, 2009–
        2023). In particular, agribusiness development, forest restoration and management, and private sector financing
        through payments for ecosystem services and carbon credits will be emphasized. These priorities are now central to
        the MoA’s updated framework, ESIF 2 (2024–2038), which provides a strategic foundation for scaling sustainable land
        management and climate action.
    14. CALM 2 will build on the landscape restoration and land tenure results achieved, expanding these to include
        restoration of forest areas and communal land tenure certification. It will introduce new initiatives to fill the gaps
        in links to value chains and access to finance, in line with MoA’s updated investment framework ESIF 2 (2024-2038).
        Additionally, CALM 2 will shift from a micro-watershed to a major watershed approach. This will allow the
        implementation of a more robust and effective landscape approach. CALM 2 will establish mechanisms to allow
        restored watersheds to transition from project-based assistance by strengthening value chains, incentivizing the
        market for ecosystem services, and enabling private capital flows to communities in restored watersheds, as well as

1
 Climate Action through Landscape Management Program (Calm P For R) Consolidated Progress Report, Dec. 2025.
2
 Soil health improvement entails a combination of activities that reduce soil erosion and treat acid soils, including increased use of
compost, manure, ag-lime, and other products.

                                                                                                                                   Page 4



                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


   strengthening linkages between community watershed management planning and implementation and other public
   programs, including soil health and public works under social protection programs. Farmers will be supported to
   develop sound business plans for productive activities, enabling them to capitalize on land certification by using their
   land certificates as collateral to access credit.
15. The Government of Ethiopia prioritizes gender-inclusive natural resource management, recognizing that women in
    Ethiopia face economic, social, and environmental risks. Women farmers produce 23 percent less than men due to
    unequal access to land, inputs, credit, and decision-making power. Female-headed households (26 percent of rural
    households) are particularly vulnerable to climate shocks, with smaller landholdings and weaker tenure rights.
    Addressing gender issues is key to reversing environmental and land degradation. The program helps address these
    gaps by securing women’s land rights, expanding women’s leadership in cooperatives, and tailoring extension, inputs,
    and livelihood support for climate‑smart, restorative practices.


PforR Program Scope, Including IPF component

16. CALM 2 enables a smooth continuation of the verification and payment systems put in place by CALM. This
    continuity deepens impact and facilitates scaling of ongoing innovations. The complementary IPF support provides
    targeted assistance that the PforR instrument cannot. It helps address specific technical and managerial capacity
    constraints. The IPF technical and procurement assistance will complement the CALM 2 DLIs to create strong
    incentives to expand landscape restoration and land administration interventions.
    (i) Summary of on-going government program
    CALM 2 is fully aligned with the government’s ESIF 2 (2024-2038) program. It advances ESIF 2 by accelerating
    inclusive economic transformation through expanded SLM practices, strengthened land tenure security, and
    enhanced market linkages in highland areas. Support will be provided over a five-year period (FY26–FY31). This
    timeline closely aligns with the first phase of ESIF 2 and is designed to strengthen institutional capacity, promote
    climate-resilient practices, and increase community engagement for long-term sustainability and improved
    livelihoods. As in CALM, the Program boundary for CALM 2 will include support for NRM extension services at woreda
    and kebele levels. It will exclude any SLM practices that rely on non-voluntary mass mobilization.
    (ii) Program Boundary and Results Areas
17. The proposed Program is built around two results areas (RAs):
    a. Results Area 1 - Participatory watershed and forest management: the Program will provide results-based
       support to incentivize field-based interventions to scale up participatory watershed and forest management
       activities to reduce land degradation and deforestation. The Program will also support (i) development of
       capacity at the federal, regional and woreda levels for participatory watershed and forest management; (ii)
       SLsM-related research at the federal and regional levels; (iii) strengthening policy, institutional and regulatory
       framework for SLsM; (iv) building the SLsM knowledge base; and (v) management, monitoring and reporting of
       ESIF 2 interventions for watershed management.
        New aspects integrated in Results Area 1 are: (i) improvement of soil health under SLsM practices; (ii)
        management of natural forest areas adjacent to Program watersheds under a Participatory Forest Management
        approach, supported directly by the CIF funds and IDA under the PforR component; (iii) direct support for
        cooperatives within the Program’s watersheds to participate in existing and emerging agri-value chains; and (iv)
        smallholder participation in payments for ecosystem services (PES) and emerging carbon markets, supported by
        Scaling Climate Action by Lowering Emissions (SCALE) program and Nordic Development Fund (NDF) financing.


                                                                                                                      Page 5



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


        The IFC will provide direct support for market linkage/advisory services and capacity building for agribusiness
        development. The IFC aims to support 10 agri-value chains through a phased approach. Once CALM 2 is
        operational, specific value chains will be identified through quick assessments of IFC clients and other firms.
    b. Results Area 2 - Rural land administration: the Program will provide results-based support for improved rural
       land tenure security and transferability of rights by incentivizing: (i) preparation of SLLCs and their issuance for
       private landholdings; and (ii) installation and operation of the NRLAIS at federal, regional and woreda levels. The
       Program will also support (iii) development of capacity at the federal, regional and woreda levels for rural land
       administration; (iv) strengthening policy, institutional and regulatory framework for rural land administration;
       and (v) management, monitoring and reporting of ESIF interventions for improved rural land tenure security.
        New aspects integrated in Results Area 2 are: (i) Second Level Land Holding Certificates (SLLCs) for communal
        lands including forests or grazing areas; and (ii) connecting land administration offices to the national digital
        infrastructure to strengthen and improve land administration services, including transparent land access and
        transferability of rights.
18. Specific ESIF2 program areas eligible for financing under CALM 2 have been selected with MoA. CALM 2 will
    establish payments linked to the area of restored land and the issuance, digitization, and of registration of land
    certificates of communal landholdings. In addition, it will provide support for communities to leverage land
    certification by linking smallholders to markets and access private sector finance. Consistent with CALM, the Program
    boundary for CALM 2 will include support for NRM extension services at woreda and kebele level and will exclude
    any SLsM practice performed as a mass mobilization scheme where evidence of voluntary labor participation is
    unavailable or questionable.
19. Integrated efforts between the Government of Ethiopia's Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) and
    CALM are advancing but require stronger coordination. So far, 369 PSNP 5 watersheds have been transferred to
    CALM with cooperatives, management plans, bank accounts, and legal procedures, and additional mature PSNP 6
    sites will follow under CALM 2. Joint planning, targeting, and shared sustainable land management (SLM) and
    watershed guidelines aim to boost the effectiveness of public works and landscape interventions. Transferring
    selected PSNP watersheds to CALM 2 allows beneficiaries to join Community Watershed Users Cooperative Societies
    (CWUCSs) and gain land tenure security and access insurance, credit, and value chains. Strengthened monitoring
    and evaluation systems and clarity on how co-financing is allocated will prevent duplicate payments. PSNP supported
    public works in CALM 2 will implement approved watershed management plans. This integration will be reflected in
    the PSNP Operations Manual.
       Table 1: Alignment with Government Program
                                   Government program                        Program supported by the           Reasons for
                                                                                    PforR Program                alignment
    Objective     To improve the livelihoods and economic well-being of To improve livelihoods by            The objectives of
                  the country’s farmers, herders, and Natural resource    expanding area under sustainable   the government
                  users by scaling up SLM practices with proven potential land management practices and      program and the
                  to restore, sustain, and enhance the productivity of    securing land tenure in degraded   PforR Program
                  Ethiopia’s land resources                               highland areas                     are fully aligned
    Duration      2024-2038                                               FY 2026-2031                        -
    Geographic     Whole Country                                         Ethiopian Highlands                 Highlands are
    coverage                                                                                                 prioritized under
                                                                                                             CALM 2. Lowland
                                                                                                             areas are


                                                                                                                         Page 6



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


                                                                                                                 supported by the
                                                                                                                 LLRP2 (P180076)
    Results areas   1. Promoting and scaling up SLsM                            1. Participatory Watershed and   Fully aligned.
                    2. Improving the Land administration and governance         Forest Restoration and           Government
                    system of Ethiopia’s Land Resources                         Management in highland areas.    results areas 1
                    3. Building the capacity of public and private sector SLM 2. Land Administration and         and 2 will be
                    advisory service providers and empowering                   Governance in highland areas     supported in
                    communities to access services.                                                              highland areas by
                    4. Improving the enabling policy, legal, institutional,                                      PforR; and 3 - 6
                    and financial environment for SLsM                                                           supported in
                    5. Building and Strengthening the ESIF SLsM Knowledge                                        highland areas by
                    Base                                                                                         the IPF
                    6. Management and implementation of the ESIF                                                 component
    Overall         Total cost, full program: US$ 35.22 billion over 15 US$ 1001.8 million (for the P4R)          PforR prioritized
    Finance         years.                                                                                       for two results
                    USD US$ 5.4 billion for the first 5 years across all result                                  areas, highlands,
                    areas relevant to CALM-2.                                                                    and first 5 years

20. The proposed Program entails support for sustainable land management and land administration, as in CALM, and
    expands to other areas of ESIF 2 including participatory forest management, value chain development and land
    certification of communal forests and grazing lands. CALM 2 will be implemented over a five-year period (FY26–
    FY31), largely aligned with the first phase of ESIF 2. This integrated approach aims to strengthen institutional capacity,
    promote climate-resilient practices, and enhance community engagement to achieve long-term sustainability and
    improved livelihoods. Consistent with CALM, the Program boundary for CALM 2 will include support for NRM
    extension services at woreda and kebele level and will exclude any SLM practice performed as a mass mobilization
    scheme where evidence of voluntary labor participation is unavailable or questionable.
   (iii) Program Beneficiaries
21. Primary beneficiaries are smallholder farmers in Program watersheds. The Program will increase smallholders’
    livelihood security and broaden income earning opportunities. Efforts will be made for the equitable inclusion of all
    beneficiaries in CWUCSs, including vulnerable groups such as landless, youth, elderly, and female-headed
    households.
   (iv) Program Expenditure Framework
22. The Program Expenditure Framework considers Government expenditure on Program goals embedded in the two
    result areas. The expenditures are disaggregated at the federal and subnational levels and are limited to areas of
    watershed development and land administration. At the federal level, the expenditure framework includes
    expenditures by MoA on: (i) Watershed Development including Agricultural Extension Advisory and Training,
    Agricultural Technical and Vocational Training, Natural Resource Development and Food Security, main program and
    support functions, Rural On and Off Farm Job Creation, Natural Resource Management Research by EAIR, , and the
    Forestry Development Program; and (ii) Rural Land Administration and Utilization Management. The Program
    primarily funds subnational expenditure, covering both recurrent and capital costs at regional and woreda levels.
23. Three broad elements of Government of Ethiopia (GoE) expenditures on SLsM are excluded from PfoR support.
    First, capital expenditures related to irrigation and other capital expenditures (worth US$559.4 million over CALM 2
    period) are excluded based on the recommendations of the CALM Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
    (ESSA). Second, activities in predominantly rangeland areas (including the Afar and Somali Regions) (worth US$86
    million over CALM2 period) will be excluded because: (i) watersheds in these areas are less suitable as planning units,


                                                                                                                             Page 7



                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


    given the physical and social characteristics of these rangelands, and (ii) provisions for issuance of communal pastoral
    land rights are at an earlier stage of development. These important challenges are being addressed through separate
    development partner-supported interventions. Third, expenditures already covered by World Bank HCO and IPF
    operations, as well as other partners (e.g. LLRP, PSNP, FSRP totaling US$3.9 billion during CALM 2), are excluded.
24. The CALM 2 will finance a subset of GoE’s expenditure on ESIF 2 over the next five years (FY26-FY31). The Program
    Expenditure Framework for the proposed operation is based on Government recurrent expenditures on Program
    goals at the federal, regional and woreda levels that are specific to watershed and forest development and land
    administration. CALM 2 financing will be through the Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfer (IGFT) system using both a
    General-Purpose grant (GPG) and a Specific Purpose grant (SPG). The Program support will be through both P4R and
    IPF investment instruments for eligible program activities. The P4R will finance recurrent spending on SLM at federal
    and sub-national levels and SPGs which are meant for eligible CALM 2 activities at both federal and regional/woreda
    levels identified in consultation with the Ministry of Agriculture.
25. The Program expenditures for the P4R are expected to total approximately US$1.45 billion after exclusions over
    the five-year implementation period. In line with CALM, CALM 2 Program implementation will focus on selected
    highland areas. For this reason, the total regional recurrent expenditure on CALM 2, takes account of the proportion
    of Program woredas (556 woredas) out of the total number of highland woredas in the country (889 woredas). These
    adjustments mean that the CALM 2 Program expenditure, after exclusions, will total US$1001.8 million, which is
    about 17 percent of the estimated total ESIF 2 investments during the same period. In terms of financing sources,
    GoE contributions from the will account for 78.7 percent of total financing, IDA 19.2 percent, SCALE 1 percent, and
    CIF 1.1 percent.
26. The expenditure framework includes GPG allocations at federal level for MoA’s recurrent expenditure for CALM 2
    (natural resource development, agricultural extension services, rural land administration and support to increase
    agricultural production and productivity) and EFD recurrent expenditure on sustainable forest management. At
    regional level, it includes recurrent expenditure on agriculture attributed to CALM (70 percent of the agriculture
    recurrent expenditures in all regions except for Afar and Somali). For the SPG, the expenditure includes federal,
    regional and woreda spending on participatory watershed and forest management (MoA, EFD, BoA); rural land
    administration (MoA, BoA, Rural Land Administration Bureau); building the capacity of public and private sector SLM
    advisory service providers and empowering communities to access services (MoA, BoA); improving the enabling
    policy, legal, institutional & financial framework (MoA, BoA); building the ESIF SLM Knowledge Base (MoA, BoA); and
    management and Implementation of the ESIF (MoA, MoF, ESS, FEACC, BoA, Woreda Agriculture offices).
27. Assessment of the Program Expenditure Framework: The CALM 2 expenditure framework has identified all costs
    required to deliver the key result areas of the Program, including sustainable land and forest management and rural
    land administration. The cost estimates provided by the government under ESIF 2 are appropriate, and the CALM 2
    expenditure framework reflects expenditures within the Program boundary. These expenditure estimates based on
    the Government of Ethiopia medium term macroeconomic and fiscal framework are closely aligned with GoE
    priorities for the sector and are considered adequate to achieve the intended results of the Program. The operation
    is not expected to pose a risk to fiscal sustainability, with Program federal and GPG expenditures reflecting allocations
    to the relevant budget lines over recent years, and fiscal policy remaining relatively prudent. The financial
    sustainability of the Program expenditures is assessed to be adequate given the ongoing economic reforms for debt
    sustainability, Government commitment for increased revenue mobilization and allocations for pro-poor sectors and
    the significant ongoing investments in agriculture, sustainable land and forest management and rural land
    administration.




                                                                                                                        Page 8



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


        (vi) IPF component
28. An IPF component financed by IDA (US$ 8million), SCALE (US$ 6 million) and the NDF (EUR 8.5 approximately US$
    9.85 million at current exchange rates) will provide cross-cutting support to generate outcomes in both result areas
    and the broader government program. It will include targeting themes where performance improvements were
    identified during the implementation of the CALM Program. The IPF component will focus on themes that directly
    map to achieve the DLIs. In addition to funding towards the IPF component, NDF and SCALE will provide EUR 1.5
    m/US$ 1.75) and US$1 million, respectively, in Bank-executed technical assistance to strengthen the Program’s
    implementation.
29. The IPF component finances five types of activities as described below.
 i. Operational needs of MoA and EFD for CALM 2 implementation, to (i) strengthen environmental and social (E&S)
    risk management; (ii) undertake land productivity assessments and valuations; (iii) enhance procurement and
    financial management capacity; and (iv) improve monitoring, reporting and verification, including the application of
    advanced remote sensing.
 ii. Agribusiness development by linking landowners to agri-businesses and supporting payments for ecosystem
     services. It will include:
        •    IFC will focus on providing integrated upstream and downstream support on agribusiness linkages, value-chain
             development, and expanded access to finance. IFC will play a role in strengthening market access and supply
             chains development with its portfolio and pipeline clients, including early-stage leads that would benefit the
             watershed users. IFC's intervention will emphasize the development and promotion of business models that
             directly involve smallholder farmers and local communities, ensuring their active participation and benefit from
             these initiatives. The IFC and the World Bank teams will collaborate closely to ensure effective implementation.
        •    Rollout of IFC Agribusiness Leadership Program (ALP): This proven Program will help agribusiness clients (CWUCS,
             aggregators, and commercial farmers) professionalize operations by building supply chains and sustainable
             enterprises. IFC will customize ALP materials and deliver Training of Trainers (ToT) for selected trainers, who will
             cascade training through government systems.
        •    Government-led cascade: Train 30% of verified CWUCS (matured watersheds), reaching 8,000 cooperative
             members. Additionally, train staff from financial institutions, private agribusiness, business development
             services, and land rental providers, who will in turn train individuals involved in SLLC-linked loans and land
             rental services prior to loan disbursement to reduce bankruptcy risk.
        •    Specialized firm engagement: Provide additional ToT, ensure quality control, and deliver ongoing coaching and
             support.
 iii.       Technical assistance for the design and implementation of PES schemes, developing partnerships among
            government agencies, local communities, and private sector actors, and supporting the emerging PES programs
            aligned with Ethiopia’s national PES policy. These actions will support mobilization of additional finance,
            promotion of sustainable land management practices, and ensuring the long-term sustainability and scalability of
            ecosystem service initiatives within the CALM Program, thus contributing to Ethiopia’s broader climate and
            development objectives.
  iv.        Operationalize pilots to promote voluntary land consolidation in Ethiopia’s highlands to demonstrate
             productivity, environmental, and social gains. These pilots involve baseline surveys, voluntary land exchange,
             and design, testing, and documentation of a computerized platform in real-world conditions. Monitoring,



                                                                                                                             Page 9



                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


           evaluation, and learning systems will be established to assess and guide the impact of these efforts, utilizing
           NRLAIS and climate indicators.
     v.    Technical assistance and capacity building activities to facilitate access to carbon markets:
           •   Technical assistance to MoA to design and register an emission reduction program targeting non-forest
               emission categories (soil carbon), including feasibility studies, baseline and benefit-sharing plans, digital
               monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) system design, and capacity building for MRV.
           •   Technical assistance to EFD to strengthen PFM implementation under CALM 2 and align with CIF-NPC
               investment planning requirements, to implement the ART116 national program on forests by enhancing the
               forest MRV and safeguards systems, updating baselines, undertaking monitoring and verification reports,
               and supporting the issuance and monetization of ART116 credits through communication, marketing and
               legal support for sales.
           •   Technical assistance to MoPD to operationalize the legal and regulatory framework related to carbon credits;
               capacity building to manage global registries, including UNFCCC optional registry; provision of IT support for
               managing registries and carbon transactions
           •   Technical assistance and grants through the Enhancing Access to Benefits while Lowering Emissions
               (EnABLE) Trust Fund. This includes: (i) establish inclusive alternate livelihoods for women and youth by
               providing group-based training and targeted livelihood grants3; and (ii) strengthen capacity and awareness
               of communities by implementing activities that can scale up conservation of ecosystem services and carbon
               sequestration through participatory forest and watershed management, land tenure and property rights
               campaigns at the community level; and (iv) establishing a community-based performance monitoring
               system4. Confirmation of EnABLE financing will take place by the end of November.
    C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)

    Program Development Objective(s)

    30. The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to expand area under sustainable land management practices,
        secure land tenure and increase market linkages in highland areas.


    31. Progress toward the achievement of the PDO will be measured through the following indicators:
           i. People benefitting from enhanced resilience of terrestrial systems (number)
           ii. Landscapes under enhanced conservation and/or sustainable management (hectare)
          iii. Program area showing an increase in Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) correcting for short-
               term weather effects (hectare)
          iv. Land area with strengthened tenure security, registered in the National Rural Land Administration
              Information System (NRLAIS) (hectare)


3
 The livelihood grants will be provided as additional financing to the existing community revolving funds.
4
 Given the geographical overlap between CALM 2 and OLFP in Oromia, EnABLE will additionally fund activities benefiting selected
OLFP communities. In these areas, community monitoring will focus on reviewing records and assessing the impact of benefit-sharing
plans and the performance of forest management cooperatives, ensuring that benefits reach vulnerable groups.

                                                                                                                            Page 10



                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


        v. New and Better-Paid Jobs (number)


 D. Environmental and Social Effects

32. The Program is expected to yield significant environmental and economic benefits through SLsM interventions
    aimed at restoring degraded land resources and communal forests. Implementation of the CALM 2 is also expected
    to ensure the sustainability of these beneficial E&S impacts through effective watershed development plans, the
    active participation of CWUCs, equitable benefit sharing, and strengthened local ownership.
33. Expanding watershed management on communal lands will yield both environmental and socioeconomic benefits.
    Rehabilitation of communal lands, coupled with allocation to unemployed youth and women, will enhance natural
    resource management, agricultural productivity, livelihood diversification, and income levels. The Program will
    support innovative financing, including payments for ecosystem services (PES), promote biodiversity conservation,
    and involve the private sector in restoration-related job creation, reduce long-term costs while maximizing landscape-
    level benefits.
34. For PforR components with substantial E&S risks, an updated Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA)
    will strengthen risk management. The updated draft ESSA outlines E&S risk management, exclusion lists (such as
    protected areas), and capacity building at all administrative levels and Addis Ababa University (AAU). The proposed
    E&S Action Plan will enhance MoA capacity, supported by the federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) through
    training, audits, and monitoring. After appraisal, the Bank will review the guideline prepared for the voluntary land
    consolidation and voluntary land exchange to make sure that the guideline is in line with the ESS5 requirements For
    IPF activities with moderate E&S risks, draft Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEPs) and Environmental and Social
    Commitment Plans (ESCPs) addressing labor, OHS, SEA/SH, and security management have been prepared. These
    instruments are under review and will be disclosed after Bank approval.

35. Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected because of a Bank
    supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to the existing
    program grievance mechanism or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints
    received are promptly reviewed to address pertinent concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may
    submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection
    Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, because of Bank non-compliance with its policies
    and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity
    to address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been
    brought directly to the Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For
    information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit
    https://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability
    Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate




                                                                                                                     Page 11



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


 Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component

36. Environment and Social risk of the IPF component is rated moderate. This moderate E&S risk rating component is
    primarily associated with health and safety concerns, travel risks, pollution, e-waste, risks related to the downstream
    implementation of Technical Assistance (TA) support (excluding protected areas), social discrimination and exclusion,
    vulnerability to sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) and sexual harassment (SH) and limited regulatory and
    coordination capacity. To mitigate these risks, the MoA will prepare, consult, and disclose an Environmental and Social
    Commitment Plan (ESCP) which will incorporate SEA/SH measures, Labor Management Procedures (LMP), and SMP
    and a standalone Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) for the TA activities prior to appraisal. Also, ToRs for TA activities
    will be prepared during implementation. The Bank has prepared an Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
    (ESSA) to assess the existing government E&S risk management capacity and identify gap filling measures. These
    measures are being incorporated into the E&S action plan.
E. Financing

                                             Table 2. Program Financing

                               Source                                 Amount (US$, Millions)            % of Total
      Counterpart Funding                                                              788.30                        76.55%

        National Government                                                            788.30                        76.55%

      International Development Association (IDA)                                      200.00                        19.42%

        IDA Grant                                                                      200.00                        19.42%

      Trust Funds                                                                        41.35                        4.03%

        Scaling Climate Action by Lowering Emissions (SCALE) MDTF                           16                        1.56%

        Free-standing TFs AFR Sustainable Development                                     9.85                        0.96%

        Climate Investment Funds                                                         11.50                        1.12%

        Enhancing Access to Benefits while Lowering Emissions
                                                                                               4                      0.39%
        (EnABLE) MDTF
                     Total Operation Financing                                        1,029.65


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank


                                                                                                                         Page 12



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results (P510697)


 Pablo Cesar Benitez Ponce
 Lead Natural Resources Management Specialist

 Shewakena Aytenfisu Abab
 Senior Environmental Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Agriculture

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Pablo Cesar Benitez Ponce, Shewakena Aytenfisu Abab

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Paul Jonathan Martin                 10-Dec-2025

Country Director:                       Maryam Salim                         16-Feb-2026




                                                                                                     Page 13



                                                                                              Official Use Only
