Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   BENIN FIRST ACCELERATED ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS (P510638)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                              Program Information Document (PID)

                                              Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Jan-2026 | Report No: PIDDA00200




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     BENIN FIRST ACCELERATED ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS (P510638)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                             FIRST BENIN ACCELERATED ECONOMIC
Benin                          P510638
                                                             TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS
Region                         Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)           Financing Instrument
WESTERN AND CENTRAL                                          Macroeconomics, Trade          Development Policy
                               17-Feb-2026
AFRICA                                                       and Investment                 Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               General Directory of taxes,
REPUBLIC OF BENIN              Ministry of Economy and
                               Finance

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to support Government reforms to create more and better jobs in high potential
sectors by (i) strengthening the regulatory environment for private sector participation, and (ii) investing in building
human capital.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                               200.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                              200.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                          200.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
Decision


                                                                                                                     Page 1



                                                                                                             Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          BENIN FIRST ACCELERATED ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS (P510638)


    The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate


    Explanation
    copied
    Summary Decision: The team is authorized to proceed with appraisal. The team is asked to return to the Chair before
    proceeding to Negotiations and to continue discussions on the PBG and MIGA second loss guarantee. Negotiations will
    be
    subject to: (i) all prior actions be completed (i.e. gazetted); (ii) addressing/incorporating guidance from the ROC
    meeting. A
    separate decision will be made on the PBG.




    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context
    Benin has achieved strong macroeconomic outcomes over the past decade, reaching middle-income country status in
    2020 and growing at 6.9 percent on average from 2021 to 2025, but needs to catalyze private activity to extend this
    progress. The robust performance reflects sound fiscal management, continued infrastructure rollout, rising private
    investment—especially in Special Economic Zones—and the emergence of new service industries like tourism. Yet
    productivity remains the central jobs challenge: workers have moved out of agriculture into lower-productivity activities
    such as commerce, construction, and trade. Recent World Bank diagnostics, including the 2022 Country Economic
    Memorandum (CEM) and 2023 Country Private Sector Diagnostic (CPSD), highlight persistent constraints: low private
    investment in productive sectors, weak human capital, uneven access to basic infrastructure and services, limited
    financing for micro- and small businesses, and the predominance of informal employment. In response, the government
    has adopted a private sector–led growth strategy (Alafia Vision 2060) focused on job-rich sectors such as agribusiness
    and tourism—through (i) establishing a regulatory environment that attracts private sector investment, and (ii)
    developing the skills and competencies necessary to support and sustain private sector–driven growth. If these market
    distortions and structural barriers are addressed, Benin could generate jobs for at least 250,000 new labor force entrants
    per year, supported by foreign direct investment (FDI) and progressively strengthening of its human capital.
    The new programmatic Development Policy Financing (DPF) series aims to address persistent constraints and consolidate
    progress to date, in alignment with the new World Bank Group 3x5x7 approach1.

    This Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation is the first in a programmatic series of three designed to support
    reforms that can effectively leverage private capital and scale up productive job creation in high-potential sectors. The

1
  The World Bank group working as one adopted a “3-part approach” where IBRD/ IDA focuses on establishing pre-conditions or
investing in infrastructure, while becoming a thought leader with knowledge to address policy and regulatory uncertainties. IFC and
MIGA are expected to support businesses with financing, equity and guarantees. The “5- part approach” relates to the selection of
five key sectors with the high potential to create jobs (including Energy, Infrastructure, Agri-business, Healthcare, Tourism and
Manufacturing”) for operations and strategies. The “7-part approach” relates to seven corporate targets that needs to be achieved by
2030 such as M300, and 1.5 billion HNP. This Series implements the 3 by 5 by 7 approach for Benin.

                                                                                                                               Page 2



                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        BENIN FIRST ACCELERATED ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS (P510638)


 proposed operation includes (i) an International Development Association (IDA) credit of US$155 million equivalent on
 standard terms (from Benin’s Performance Based Allocation); (ii) an IDA credit of US$45 million equivalent on Scale Up
 Window Shorter Maturity Loan terms. The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to support government reforms to
 create more and better jobs in high potential sectors by (i) strengthening the regulatory environment for private sector
 participation, and (ii) investing in human capital. The series targets an ambitious results framework, building on reform
 synergies and effective sequencing to support job creation and poverty reduction. The reform program is explicitly
 aligned with the World Bank Group’s 3-by-5-by-7 Jobs Framework, combining economy-wide enabling reforms with
 targeted sectoral interventions to unlock job opportunities at scale.2 The operation is expected to improve the investment
 climate, help micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) to grow, and crowd in private capital, particularly in new
 economic hubs, while expanding access to core services, including electricity, clean cooking, drinking water, equity
 financing (notably for women-led firms), and tourism-related employment.

Benin’s macroeconomic policy framework is deemed adequate for the proposed operation. Growth is projected to
average 7.1 percent in 2025–28, with low inflation. Given the government’s solid track record of prudent macroeconomic
policy, the country could achieve even higher growth in the next decade with an ambitious reform agenda, including some
proposed under this DPF series. The fiscal deficit is projected to remain below the WAEMU fiscal deficit target of 3 percent
over the medium term. This is supported by the 2024-28 Medium-Term Revenue Strategy (MTRS), which aims to increase
domestic revenue by 0.5 percentage point (ppt) of GDP annually, and measures to sustain policy reforms including through
the adoption in July 2025 of the Alafia 2060 Vision law and associated budget program. Total debt is projected to continue
a downward trajectory in the medium term from 60.4 percent of GDP in 2024 to around 52 percent by 2028. However,
external debt is on an upward trend, reaching 48.9 percent of GDP in 2025 and about 85.3 percent of total debt. The
authorities issued a US$750 million Eurobond in 2024 and EUR500 million Eurobond in 2025, although they used the
majority of this for early repayment of external and domestic debt. On January 22, 2026, Benin successfully issued its first
international Sukuk and Eurobond of 2026, raising a total of US$850 million, without an associated debt management
operation. These two issuances are already equivalent to about 42 percent of the Government’s 2026 financing needs or
88 percent of planned external financing for 2026, extending the reliance on external debt. This further reduces the
economy’s shock-absorption capacity and requires additional effort to meet the government’s 2025–29 medium-term debt
strategy to lower the share of external debt to 70 percent by 2029. Benin remains at moderate risk of external and overall
debt distress based on a January 2026 Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) prepared by the IMF and World Bank. Risks
nevertheless include: i) a high debt service-to-revenue ratio which leaves the country vulnerable to revenue
underperformance or shifts in market sentiment that could increase rollover costs, ii) climate shocks, iii) worsening security
in the North, iv) unexpected extended impact of the recent coup d’etat on private investment and tourism ahead of
elections, and v) rising regional and global uncertainties. Both macro risk and the overall risk of the operation are assessed
as Substantial.
  Relationship to CPF

The proposed operation aligns with the new WBG FY26–35 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and the priority areas
in the 'Benin Vision 2060' and PRA strategy. This operation draws on projects in the World Bank portfolio and ongoing
dialogue related to the FY26–35 CPF, and it is closely linked to corporate scorecard indicators, including tax-to-GDP
performance and private capital mobilization. Complementary projects in the Benin portfolio include Dogo-Bis (WBG),
SME finance and climate finance (IFC), the Skills Development Program (WBG), WASH services, and the Nutrition MPA,

2 The World Bank Group’s 3-by-5-by-7 jobs framework aims to accelerate job creation and economic transformation by focusing on three

economy‑wide enablers (foundational infrastructures, business‑enabling policy, and private capital mobilization), five high‑impact sectors for jobs
(energy, digital, agribusiness, tourism, and value‑added manufacturing), and seven corporate targets (access to energy, internet, health services,
social protection, financial inclusion, agribusiness and climate financing).

                                                                                                                                                Page 3



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         BENIN FIRST ACCELERATED ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS (P510638)


WARDIP (WBG). The operation directly contributes to all three CPF strategic job pillars: Foundational Infrastructure,
Regulatory Environment, and Enhanced Private Sector. Improved access to electricity supports CPF Outcome Area 2, while
expanded access to finance is aligned with Outcome Area 3. In addition, establishing rural economic hubs for agribusiness
and unlocking tourism potential fit under Outcome Area 4.3 The PRA objectives related to improved access to services and
infrastructure in underserved areas (specifically, the creation of an industrial zone in Parakou would help with youth job
creation in the northern region, action again stunting will be more impactful for children in the northern region as stunting
is higher the northern regions), job creation for youth, and citizen engagement – key to addressing underlying factors of
fragility.
    C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

    The Project Development Objective is to support Government reforms to create more and better jobs in high
    potential sectors by (i) strengthening the regulatory environment for private sector participation, and (ii) investing in
    building human capital.

    Key Results

The main results expected from the operation are to have: increased private sector participation, enhanced investment
climate and improved survival and ecosystem for MSMEs growth; increased number of people with access to drinking
water in urban areas, increased number of businesses with access to equity financing (including women-led businesses),
increased number of household provided with direct access to electricity, increased percentage of households using
modern clean cooking fuel, increased tax revenue collection, increased number of new jobs in the tourism sector,
increased number of technical partnerships contracts signed, increased private capital mobilized to new economic hubs,
increased number of young people (14-35 years) who have successfully completed training or a sustained qualification
with specific skills. General equilibrium model simulations suggest that the reform program could raise real GDP per capita
by about 2.3 percentage points (ppt) by 2030 and generate about 25 thousand new jobs and 200 thousand better-paying
jobs across key sectors of the economy and ultimately lift thousands of people out of poverty through increased labor
income and expanded economic opportunities. Tourism, manufacturing and agro-industry, access to finance, and data
warehouse reforms are expected to be the main drivers of job gains, supported by productivity improvements, cross-
sector spillovers, and increased FDI. In addition, these reforms are expected to mobilize substantial private capital,
particularly in tourism and economic hubs for manufacturing.

    D. Project Description

The Series supports job creation in high-potential sectors like agribusiness, light manufacturing, and tourism, while
promoting private sector-enabling-reforms through a sequenced approach that advances significant improvements in
human capital and infrastructure, access to finance regulations and tax compliance. This DPF series is highly innovative,
not only in its reform content but also in the way it mobilizes financing to support implementation. The DPO is a joint
effort between the World Bank and the IFC that leverages efforts from other development partners using the same reform
matrix. During the first operation of the Series, the team will operationalize a signed Memorandum of Understanding with
OPEC, IFC, AIIB, and African Development Bank (AFDB) to ensure that OPEC financing complements World Bank support
as an additional and reliable source of funding (EUR30million using the same DPO reform matrix). AFDB will disburse its

3
 The proposed CPF Outcome areas are (Outcome area 1: Unlocking Human Capital, Outcome Area 2: Enhancing key infrastructure
enablers, Outcome area 3: Strengthened Governance and Institutions and Outcome area 4: More private investment).

                                                                                                                            Page 4



                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         BENIN FIRST ACCELERATED ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS (P510638)


budget support operation to pre-finance electricity connections in Q1 of 2026 (PA1), while the IMF tackles the
institutionalization of a mechanism for water tariffication in urban areas. The World Bank team has been working closely
with the IMF as well during the preparation of this DPF series on domestic resource mobilization, growth and debt
sustainability.

The first operation supports new jobs-enabling reforms while leveraging past budget support interventions, to achieve
results, with a financing package comprising US$140 million of IDA credit (US$ 111 million- Performance Based
Allocation and US$29 million- Scale Up Window SML) and an EUR 200 million IDA Policy-Based Guarantee (PBG). The
proposed PBG aims to enable Benin to access long-term commercial financing at more favorable terms than would
otherwise be available in the market. Unlike the previous standalone PBG operations in 2017 and 2024, this operation
would combine an IDA first-loss guarantee with a contemplated MIGA second-loss guarantee, delivering 95 percent
combined coverage and enhanced pricing compression. This structure builds on the successful deployment of the
combined IBRD-MIGA guarantee in Côte d'Ivoire in 2025. The Series prioritizes continuity, advancing reforms from the
2022-24 DPF to extend outcomes. It strengthens foundational growth enablers, aligns with the Government’s prevention
strategy, and aligns with global commitments such as the M300 Compact and Agri-Connect. For instance, it prioritizes
access to electricity￼4by operationalizing the Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy Fund (FERER) and establishing
a Fund to pre-finance the cost of electricity connections and wiring inspection costs, while supporting the viability of the
electricity production and distribution companies (CEM 2022, Benin M300 Compact 2025). The Series also builds on
Benin’s recent economic progress by introducing reforms to make growth more poverty-reducing across the country
through faster economic transformation and stronger job creation. It builds on the government’s commitments, as part
of the Prevention and Resilience Allocation (PRA) to expand the coverage of socioeconomic infrastructures and services
to underserved and high-risk areas (milestones #1 and #3), provide technical training and financing support for job creation
to youth in northern departments and at-risk areas (milestone #2), while promoting greater citizen engagement and
participation (milestone #8). Benin accessed the PRA in 2024, enabling deeper support to address fragility risks and
provide space for critical policy dialogue and stronger partnerships.



To support Government reforms that create more and better jobs in high-potential sectors, this DPF series, comprising
three operations, has the following pillars:
Pillar #1. Strengthening the regulatory environment for private sector participation. This pillar supports the: (i)
implementation of the 2020 investment code, with the creation of regional economic hubs, to accelerate light
manufacturing and agro-industries development for jobs; (ii) promotion of access to electricity; (iii) increase in access to
finance for business; (iv)reduction of tax evasion (including in the formal sector) to improve domestic resource
mobilization needed for a sustained development; and (iv) formalization and promotion of jobs creation in the tourism
sector. The first series of reforms include: (i) a decree defining the creation of Regional Economic Poles for Light Industry
and Agribusiness and designating regional authorities in charge of implementing the 2020 Investment Code in Regional
Economic poles, with well-defined roles; (ii) a decree on the management of the Rural Electrification and Renewable
Energy Fund, including the financing of renewable energy, energy efficiency and electricity security projects/activities and
setting up the fund management bodies; (iii) a decree to require alternative lenders (FinTech, e-money institutions) to
participate in the sharing and use of credit data at the Credit Reporting Bureau (BIC); (iv) an arrêté to set up a Business
Intelligence unit in charge of putting in place a platform to facilitate cross-checking and scheduling of tax audits; and



4
    Commenced in previous DPOs (P178042 and P176513).

                                                                                                                         Page 5



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       BENIN FIRST ACCELERATED ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS (P510638)


integrating the data from the General Tax Directorate applications into the platform. (v) a decree digitizing and
standardizing the collection of tourism statistics as well as updating the regulations for accreditation of tourist guides.


Pillar #2. Investing in building human capital. The second pillar focuses on : (i) promoting clean cooking and linking energy
transition with job creation and ensuring that the shift toward LPG does not only address environmental concerns but also
accelerates inclusive economic transformation; (ii) reducing the prevalence of stunting and enhance maternal health; (iii)
increasing and sustaining access to quality TVET to address the mismatch between skills and labor market needs, and
difficulties in job placement as well as exclusion of certain youth groups; (iv) improving access to safe drinking water.
Reforms implemented during the first operation include: (i) a decree introducing the 1.5 kg and 3 kg LPG cylinders;
guaranteeing the interchangeability of gas cylinders between operators; along with an interministerial arrêté defining the
procedures for managing gas cylinders between Benin's oil depots and approved distribution companies; (ii) a revised
decree institutionalizing the financial coverage of prenatal consultation costs for pregnant women and issued a note
extending the nutritional supplements program for pregnant and lactating women, and for children aged 6 to 23 months
from 5 communes to 13 communes; (iii) an implementing decree establishing and defining the mode of operation of the
TVET Financing Mechanism, which: guarantees private sector representation on the board of directors and management
bodies of the mechanism; clarifies the conditions of access to the windows of the TVET funding mechanism and
institutionalizes the publication of annual performance reports and independent audit reports of the mechanism; and (iv)
a decree amending the statutes of the Société Nationale des Eaux du Benin (SONEB), to refocus it on the operation of the
public water service in urban areas.



 E. Implementation

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

This DPF series is designed to be highly innovative, not only in its reform content but also in the way it mobilizes
financing to support implementation. The government carried out wide consultations with various stakeholders,
including central and local authorities, unions, private sector operators, civil service organizations (CSO), religious groups,
women’s organizations, the media, development organizations, and youth groups—in the preparation of its Alafia vision
2060 strategic document which it used as the basis for discussing this program. The World Bank also organized extensive
consultations with government departments in several sectors, deep-dive consultative meetings with academia and CSOs
and finally with the Ministry of Economy of Finance. The final program is a joint effort between the World Bank Group and
the government. It also leveraged input from development partners working in the selected sectors. Under the first
operation, the team will operationalize a signed MOU with AfDB, AIIB, IFC, and OPEC to ensure that OPEC financing (EUR
30 million) complements World Bank support as an additional and reliable funding source. OPEC has already held its
concept note review meeting, confirming its support, and plans to go to its Board by end-Q1 2026, conditional on World
Bank Board approval of the DPF. The AfDB will disburse its budget support operation to prefinance electricity connections
in Q1 of 2026 (PA1), while the IMF tackles the institutionalization of a mechanism for water tariffication in urban areas.
The World Bank team has been working closely with the IMF as well during the preparation of this DPF series on domestic
resource mobilization, growth, and debt sustainability. The Ministry of Economy and Finance leads program
implementation, while the World Bank and the Economic and Financial Programs Monitoring Unit (CSPEF) lead its
monitoring and evaluation.




                                                                                                                          Page 6



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       BENIN FIRST ACCELERATED ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS (P510638)


The World Bank will organize regular assessments of the implementation of the reforms in line with the agreed results
indicators in the Policy and Results Matrix. The monitoring will also be carried out with a strong cooperation with
development partners as the DPF operationalize a signed Memorandum of Understanding with OPEC, IFC, AIIB, and
African Development Bank (AFDB). Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by specific
country policies supported as Prior Actions or tranche release conditions under the DPF may submit complaints to the
responsible country authorities, appropriate local/national grievance mechanisms, or the Bank’s Grievance Redress
Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns.
Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability
Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a
result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides
communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution.



 F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

 Poverty and Social Impacts
Pillar 1 reforms are expected to generate positive social and poverty impacts by expanding economic opportunities and
improving access to infrastructure and financial services. The creation of Regional Economic Poles (PA1) is designed to
stimulate local economies and promote job creation in light manufacturing and agribusiness, particularly benefiting rural
populations, youth, and women. Reforms in the tourism sector (PA5) are expected to professionalize the sector and
enhance income opportunities for informal workers and women. The operationalization of the Rural Electrification and
Renewable Energy Fund (FERER) (PA2) will expand access to clean energy in underserved areas, improving living conditions
and enabling productive uses of electricity. The inclusion of alternative lenders in the Credit Reporting Bureau (PA3) is
expected to enhance financial inclusion for micro-entrepreneurs and informal sector workers, while the establishment of
a Business Intelligence unit (PA4) aims to reduce tax evasion and broaden the tax base, indirectly supporting poverty
reduction through improved public resource mobilization. Further details on the distributional impacts and mitigation
measures for each reform are provided in Annex 4. Reforms under Pillar 1 align with the government’s prevention strategy
and PRA commitments on strengthening economic development hubs and creating more employment opportunities
(milestone #1 and #2) and facilitating equitable and sustainable access and management of natural resources to enhance
social cohesion (milestone #3 and #5).

The reforms under Pillar 2 are expected to improve access to essential services and strengthen human capital, with
direct benefits for poor and vulnerable populations. The introduction of small LPG cylinders and liberalization of the clean
cooking sector (PA6) is anticipated to reduce health risks and time poverty, particularly for women and children. The
expansion of financial coverage for prenatal consultations and nutritional supplements (PA7) will support maternal and
child health, contributing to reductions in stunting and improved early childhood development. The operationalization of
the TVET Financing Mechanism (PA8), with private sector involvement, is expected to enhance the employability of youth
and women by aligning vocational training with labor market needs. The reform of SONEB to improve access to safe
drinking water in urban areas (PA9) will reduce health risks and improve quality of life for low-income households. A
detailed assessment of each prior action and expected social and poverty impacts is presented in the Annex, along with a
summary table. Reforms under Pillar 2 contribute to addressing fragility dynamics related to unequal access to public
services and regional disparities and aligns with the prevention strategy’s focus on public service delivery in underserved
areas (milestone #1) and job creation (milestone #2).

 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects


                                                                                                                        Page 7



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       BENIN FIRST ACCELERATED ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS (P510638)


The reform program is not expected to cause significant and irreversible risks and negative impacts on the environment,
forests, and other natural resources. By supporting reforms regarding energy transition through promoting the adoption
of clean cooking solutions (Prior Action #6), the program contributes to reducing deforestation and carbon emissions and
limiting or even eliminating exposure to toxic fumes. However, the implementation of certain Pillar 1 reforms may be a
source of risks and negative environmental and social impacts. For example, the implementation of Prior Action #1, which
aims to support the creation of manufacturing and agri-food industries, could be a source of CO2 emissions and generate
significant quantities of waste, the consumption of many resources (water, electricity, etc.) and lead to transfers of
pollutants into the "water-soil-air" environment. The implementation of Prior Action #2, which aims to improve access to
electricity in rural areas through the financing of rural electrification activities, support for indoor wiring in rural areas,
and wide dissemination of solar home systems in remote areas may be a source of air pollution, degradation of soil
structures, biodiversity, and associated ecosystem services at the level of rights-of-way and along the routes. Excavations
of the areas concerned could also be a source of harm to the health and safety of workers and populations—risks
associated with electrification, electrocution and burns. All these environmental risks and impacts are considered
moderate at the current stage of program preparation. Benin's national environmental and social legislation has measures
and requirements to avoid, reduce, or compensate for these risks and negative impacts of the program.


 G. Risks and Mitigation

62.      The overall risk level is substantial. Political and governance risks are rated substantial, reflecting Benin’s
deteriorating security environment and underlying fragility dynamics. Insecurity and fragility risks have intensified as the
country faces the highest number of attacks and fatalities among Gulf of Guinea states since violent extremist groups
reached coastal borders in 2019; 2024 has been the deadliest year yet, with 401 violent incidents against civilians—five
times the level recorded in 2021. The northern departments of Alibori and Atacora are particularly vulnerable,
experiencing recurrent extremist attacks, while broader fragility dynamics—including land disputes, socioeconomic
inequalities, and politico-economic grievances—continue to manifest across the territory, sometimes resulting in localized
insecurity. Benin now lies at the convergence of rising insecurity, diplomatic tensions with Sahelian neighbors, and
domestic political pressures, a context underscored by the December 7 coup attempt ahead of the 2026 elections. Risk
mitigation is underpinned by the reform program of this DPF series supporting progress towards the government’s 2024–
29 prevention supported by the PRA and development strategy objectives through improved access to infrastructure, skills
development, and targeted job creation in vulnerable areas. Macroeconomic risks are rated substantial. These risks stem
mainly from higher debt—especially external—following the recent debt reclassification, rising security costs due to
deteriorating conditions in the North and the foiled coup in December 2025, and the possibility that election-related
spending will exceed plans. The larger debt burden reduces the capacity to absorb shocks by raising the debt service-to-
revenue ratio, leaving debt vulnerable to revenue shortfalls or tighter market conditions that would raise rollover costs.
Benin should slow its reliance on potentially riskier external budget financing given the implications for debt sustainability
and exchange rate risk. While the recent coup is expected to have limited impact on private investment, worsening
regional security could push up security spending, crowd out pro-growth investment, and weaken investor confidence.
Benin does not typically overspend in election years, but the cost of the 2026 elections amid heightened security concerns
may necessitate shifting expenditures toward recurrent spending over capital. Given Benin’s prudent fiscal track record,
the authorities plan to continue fiscal consolidation in 2026. Benin has also tightened oversight of SOEs. Security risks in
the North are being addressed through expanded social programs for 2026–2028—particularly in education, health, and
social assistance—including an extension of nutritional supplements for pregnant women under this DPF.



                                                                                                                          Page 8



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     BENIN FIRST ACCELERATED ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS (P510638)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Felix Oppong
 Senior Economist

 Fulbert Tchana Tchana
 Lead Economist

 Vincent Launay
 Senior Infrastructure Finance Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 REPUBLIC OF BENIN

Implementing Agencies
 General Directory of taxes

 Ministry of Economy and Finance

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                        Felix Oppong, Fulbert Tchana Tchana, Vincent Launay

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:

Country Director:                           Marie-Chantal Uwanyiligira            26-Jan-2026



                                                                                                          Page 9



                                                                                                  Official Use Only
The World Bank
BENIN FIRST ACCELERATED ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND JOBS (P510638)




                                                                            Page 10



                                                                     Official Use Only
