Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 04/01/2026 | Report No: ESRSC05578




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Apr 06, 2026                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510631                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       CP Plan 2                    2027

                     Operation Name            Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Thailand                  Thailand                                 EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC        Water


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     The Kingdom of            Royal Irrigation Department              06-Nov-2026                  17-Feb-2027
                     Thailand

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date




Public Disclosure
                     27-Mar-2026               1,101,525,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve flood management and strengthen resilience to water-related climate risks in the Lower Chao Phraya Basin


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (also called Eastern Floodway ) is the largest element of Thailand’s 9-part
                     comprehensive plan for addressing the serious flood challenges in the Chao Phraya basin. Plan 2 will reduce flooding in
                     the lower Chao Phraya basin by creating 800 cubic meters per second (cms) of additional flood routing capacity. It
                     consists of two parts: (a) Expanding the capacity of the existing Chainat-Pasak canal (total length of 132 km) from 130
                     cms to 930 cms; and (b) Construction of a new diversion canal (total length of 136 km and design capacity of 600 cms)
                     from the Pasak River to the Gulf of Thailand. The total cost of Plan 2 program is US$4.3 billion, and it will be financed
                     jointly by the Govt of Thailand and a consortium of development partners led by the World Bank. The Plan 2 program
                     will be implemented in two phases, and the first phase will have the following components: Component 1: Climate-


                    Apr 06, 2026                                                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)



                     resilient flood management infrastructure (total cost US$1,050 million, IBRD financing US$578 million). This Component
                     will finance physical works, associated control structures and systems, and other activities for increasing the flood
                     drainage capacity in the eastern Chao Phraya basin. Specifically, it will include: i. Capacity-expansion in the construction-
                     ready sections of the existing Chainat-Pasak canal, to increase its capacity by 800 m3/s; ii. Construction of selected
                     sections of the new Pasak-Gulf of Thailand canal, with a design capacity of 600 m3/s; and iii. Construction and
                     installation of associated control structures and operating systems for the parallel canal system. Component 2:
                     Strengthened capacity for climate-smart water and flood management (US$20 million, IBRD financing US$13 million).
                     This component will aim to strengthen the capacity of RID and associated institutions in climate-resilient water
                     management, focusing on sustainability, robustness, and long-term effectiveness that go beyond the project’s spatial
                     and temporal scope. Among other things, it will finance: (i) the modernization and expansion of hydromet and
                     telemetry networks; (ii) the upgrading/development of flood forecasting models; (iii) the development of a
                     comprehensive Decision-Support System (DSS) for network operations; and (iv) the development of an asset
                     management system and a digital operation and maintenance (O&M) planning platform. The component will also
                     support interventions to strengthen institutional coordination in the water and emergency management space.
                     Component 3: Project Management (US$30 million, IBRD financing US$19 million). This component will support project
                     management and implementation via: (i) technical, environmental, and social supervision; (ii) project audits and M&E;
                     (iii) recruitment of a Project Management Consultancy (PMC) to support implementation, M&E, FM, environmental and
                     social (E&S) safeguards, and procurement; and (iv) establishing a Grievance Mechanism.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings



Public Disclosure
                     The Eastern Floodway Phase 1 project will be implemented in the eastern part of the Chao Phraya River Basin to
                     improve flood management and strengthen resilience from upstream areas toward the Gulf of Thailand. The project
                     corridor spans multiple provinces and traverses predominantly agricultural landscapes, rural settlements, peri-urban
                     and urban areas, and estuarine environments connecting to the Gulf of Thailand. The area features an extensive
                     network of existing irrigation and flood management infrastructure. While much of the corridor follows modified
                     landscapes, the project also interacts with natural waterways, wetlands, riparian vegetation, and estuarine ecosystems
                     that provide ecological functions and support local livelihoods. The project area does not intersect protected areas but
                     overlaps two Key Biodiversity Areas (Inner Gulf of Thailand and Lower Central Basin) and approximately 47 rai of
                     mangrove forest, mostly on private land, in estuarine sections.

                     The project area has a complex social setting. The Chainat-Pasak canal corridor passes through four provinces (Chainat,
                     Nakhon Sawan, Lopburi, and Saraburi), while the new Pasak-Gulf of Thailand canal traverses five provinces — Saraburi,
                     Nakhon Nayok, Pathum Thani, Chachoengsao, and Samut Prakan. Communities along both corridors include long-
                     established agricultural households dependent on canal-based irrigation, residential occupants, and commercial and
                     industrial land users with varying tenure security. Land use along the canal corridors includes rice fields, orchards, mixed
                     farming, and residential areas. No Indigenous Peoples or historically underserved traditional communities have been
                     confirmed in the project area; a social screening will be conducted during preparation. Key vulnerable groups include
                     low-income households, female-headed households, elderly persons, persons with disabilities, and LGBTQI+ individuals.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented by the Large Scale Water Resources Development Division of the Royal Irrigation
                     Department (RID). RID has a century of experience in water infrastructure development under Thailand's national

                    Apr 06, 2026                                                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)



                     environmental regulatory framework, including the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) system, and has established
                     dedicated units for environmental and social (E&S) assessment and management. Nonetheless, RID has not
                     implemented a World Bank-financed project since the 1980s and has no recent experience applying the World Bank ESF
                     or equivalent international E&S standards. Targeted capacity strengthening will therefore be required, particularly in
                     involuntary resettlement, stakeholder engagement, labor management, biodiversity, dredged material disposal,
                     incident reporting, and the preparation and implementation of ESF instruments.

                     While RID has commissioned a national EIA for the Pasak–Gulf of Thailand greenfield canal and initiated public
                     consultations under the Thai regulatory framework, key gaps remain relative to WB ESS requirements, including
                     environmental and social impact assessments for the Chainat-Pasak canal expansion, involuntary resettlement, labor,
                     biodiversity, and cultural heritage, all of which will be addressed through preparation-phase technical assistance
                     supported by an IBRD preparation grant.

                     During preparation, RID will designate E&S focal points and procure an E&S consultancy to support the preparation of
                     ESF instruments. The Project will also finance technical support and capacity strengthening, through a Project
                     Management Consultancy to assist RID in E&S management, monitoring, reporting, and compliance with ESF
                     requirements throughout project implementation. The World Bank will complement these arrangements through ESF
                     training, site visits, and implementation support missions.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                              High



Public Disclosure
                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial
                     The Environmental risk rating is Substantial, reflecting the large spatial footprint of brownfield construction and
                     rehabilitation works for flood management infrastructure along the Chainat-Pasak Canal and some greenfield
                     construction along the Pasak-Gulf of Thailand Canal, spanning agricultural, rural, peri-urban, urban, and estuarine
                     areas connected to the Gulf of Thailand. Key risks are associated with Component 1, including excavation, dredging,
                     vegetation clearance, large earthworks, construction or upgrading of control structures, and relocation or
                     rehabilitation of public infrastructure and utilities. Potential impacts include changes in hydrological conditions and
                     downstream flows; bank erosion, scouring, and sedimentation at confluence anddischarge points; disturbance or loss
                     of terrestrial and aquatic habitats; biodiversity impacts; deterioration of surface water quality from sediment
                     mobilization; and generation of large volumes of spoil and dredged materials. Management of increased downstream
                     flows during construction is a critical risk for community health and safety. Construction-related impacts such as
                     noise, dust, and traffic disruption may affect nearby communities, with additional risks arising from construction
                     camps, equipment yards, and fuels and materials Storage. Occupational and community health and safety risks,
                     particularly related to infrastructure relocation, will require careful management. Component 1 also includes
                     upgrading of the existing Rama VI barrage to regulate higher inflows from the Chainat-Pasak canal; a dam safety
                     assessment will be conducted during project preparation to inform project design. Environmental risks under
                     Component 2 are expected to be low, as activities focus on technical systems and institutional strengthening. Overall
                     risks are considered manageable through mitigation measures to be defined during project preparation. The risk
                     rating will be revisited as greenfield activities are further defined.


                    Apr 06, 2026                                                                                                     Page 4 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)



                                                                                                                                           High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risk is rated High. Component 1 activities will result in land acquisition of sections along the Pasak-Gulf of
                     Thailand Canal and physical and economic displacement of households and businesses within the right of way of the
                     existing Chainat-Pasak Canal, including those without formal land titles. Additional risks include labor influx; SEA/SH;
                     child and forced labor; discrimination in employment of women and vulnerable groups; OHS; and community health
                     and safety risks from increased traffic, haulage, water contamination and vector borne diseases during civil works.
                     Some of the existing hydraulic infrastructure is over 90 years old and holds heritage value. Canal dredging and
                     widening carry risk of disturbing above- and below-ground heritage sites in the project corridor. The diversity of
                     affected and interested stakeholders require structured, multi-level stakeholder engagement strategies and grievance
                     mechanisms. Exclusion of vulnerable groups, including persons with disabilities, elderly, LGBTQI + groups, etc., from
                     consultations is also a potential risk. Public consultations already initiated under the national EIA process provide a
                     useful foundation for further engagement. The project SEA/SH risk has been assessed to be Low and will be
                     reassessed during preparation. RID's limited experience with World Bank and other development partners’ safeguard
                     policies will be addressed through a dedicated E&S capacity building plan. Prior to appraisal, the project will prepare
                     and disclose a SEP; a Resettlement Plan (RP) with Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP) for the Chainat-Pasak Canal
                     corridor, where engineering design is sufficiently advanced to identify affected persons and define entitlements; a
                     Resettlement Framework (RF) for the Pasak-Gulf of Thailand Canal corridor, where the final designs and resettlement
                     footprint are not yet fully defined, with a site-specific RP to be prepared and disclosed before civil works commence
                     on that corridor; and an ESCP.




Public Disclosure
                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant for assessing and managing a broad range of anticipated E&S risks. The project will apply the
                      mitigation hierarchy to avoid, minimize or compensate as needed. E&S instruments will be prepared to identify,
                      assess, and manage potential risks including changes in hydrological and flow patterns; erosion and sedimentation;
                      biodiversity impacts; water quality; spoils and pollution management; traffic; permanent and temporary
                      displacement and livelihood losses; social exclusion; and occupational and community health and safety. Instruments
                      to be prepared prior to appraisal include a Supplementary ESIA, covering cumulative and indirect impacts, including
                      those from upstream water management and land-use change, with associated ESMPs including spoil management
                      measures; LMP; Critical Habitat Assessment; Dam Safety Assessment; SEP; Resettlement Framework; and
                      Resettlement Plan. The ESCP will document additional plans to be developed as required during implementation.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant and central to the successful delivery of the project given that the canal system serves as one of the
                      most economically and socially important landscapes in Thailand. The diversity of affected and interested
                      stakeholders, including national and local government agencies, directly affected households and businesses, private
                      sector, academia, media and CSOs etc., requires structured, multi-level stakeholder engagement strategies and
                      grievance mechanisms. Exclusion of vulnerable groups, including female-headed households, the elderly, persons


                    Apr 06, 2026                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)



                      with disabilities, LGBTQI + groups, etc., from stakeholder consultations is a potential risk. Public consultations already
                      initiated under the national EIA process provide a useful foundation for further engagement. In line with ESS10,
                      detailed stakeholder mapping and analysis will be conducted as part of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and
                      GM preparation before appraisal and maintained throughout implementation.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. Large-scale civil works will engage direct direct workers (PIU staff), contracted workers
                      (consultants and contractors), and primary supply workers over an extended period. No community workers are
                      expected. Thailand's labor laws address non-discrimination, freedom of association, minimum working age,
                      prohibition of child and forced labor, OHS, and dispute resolution. LMP will be prepared before appraisal to address
                      OHS risks, child and forced labor in the supply chain, labor camp conditions, workers’ grievance mechanisms, SEA/SH
                      risk mitigation, and a Code of Conduct. Contractors will be required to comply with national laws, ESS2, and WBG EHS
                      Guidelines. Site-specific OHS and contractor management plans will be developed during implementation.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant due to large-scale civil works under Component 1, including canal expansion and new canal
                      construction involving excavation, dredging, and earthworks. Key risks relate to the generation and management of
                      significant volumes of spoil and dredged materials, surface water quality deterioration from sediment mobilization
                      and construction runoff, and soil and water contamination from fuels, lubricants, and construction materials.
                      Additional impacts include air and noise pollution during construction. During operation, changes in flow patterns




Public Disclosure
                      may affect water quality at confluence and discharge points. Mitigation measures, including a spoil management
                      measures, and water quality monitoring, will be defined through the Supplementary ESIA and ESMPs prior to
                      appraisal, in line with ESS3. ESS3 risks under Components 2 and 3 are expected to be minimal.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant. Potential Community Health and Safety (CHS) risks stem from civil works, including increased traffic
                      and haulage, noise, vibration, air pollution, temporary road access disruptions, and possible water contamination
                      during excavation. Dam safety risks from hydraulic control structures and regulator failures during construction and
                      operations can cause damage to downstream communities and industrial estates along the basin. Emergency
                      Preparedness Plans (EPPs) and community-level early warning and evacuation procedures will be assessed and
                      developed as part of project design during preparation. The Supplementary ESIA will assess CHS risks, particularly for
                      vulnerable groups, and define mitigation, monitoring, and reporting measures. All design and construction activities
                      will comply with national regulations, WBG EHS Guidelines, and Good International Industry Practice (GIIP). A Dam
                      Safety Assessment will be completed prior to appraisal.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement are expected for the construction of the new Pasak-Gulf of Thailand
                      canal and along sections of the existing Chainat-Pasak canal ROW, resulting in physical displacement (loss of shelter
                      and residential land) and economic displacement (loss of agricultural land, productive assets, businesses, and
                      livelihoods). Displacement of households and businesses including those without formal land titles is expected,
                      further heightening the risk of exclusion from entitlements if not proactively managed. Restrictions on access to canal


                    Apr 06, 2026                                                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)



                      water resources during and after construction may also affect livelihoods dependent on these resources. The number
                      of affected households and businesses will be determined during preparation. A RP with a LRP for the Chainat-Pasak
                      canal corridor and a RF for the Pasak-Gulf of Thailand canal, with a site-specific RP to be prepared, and disclosed
                      before civil works commence, will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project traverses three nationally important wetland areas: the Lower Central Plain, the Chao Phraya River, and
                      the Pa Sak River. Civil works, including large-scale excavation, dewatering, and installation of sluice gates, may affect
                      terrestrial and aquatic habitats, alter flow patterns and sediment transport which may impede fish movement and
                      breeding habitats and influence downstream and estuarine habitats. The project corridors do not intersect protected
                      areas but overlaps two KBAs (Inner Gulf of Thailand and Lower Central Basin) and approximately 47 rai of mangrove
                      forest (mostly on private land) in estuarine sections. The Thai EIA requires RID offset mangrove loss at a ratio of 20:1.
                      A CHA will be conducted during project preparation to confirm the presence of critical habitat within the AOI. Should
                      critical habitat be identified, ESS6 requirements including biodiversity net gain will apply, with additional measures
                      defined as needed beyond national requirements.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is currently not relevant. Based on available project information, no Indigenous Peoples or historically




Public Disclosure
                      underserved traditional local communities are known to be present in, or maintain collective attachment to, the
                      project area of influence. A social screening will be conducted during project preparation as part of the
                      Supplementary ESIA process and stakeholder mapping to verify the absence or presence of such groups.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      ESS8 is relevant. Given the scale of land disturbance across predominantly rural and peri-urban landscape, including
                      areas with long-established communities, historic irrigation infrastructure over 90 years old, and religious sites, there
                      is a risk of encountering previously unknown archaeological or cultural heritage resources during excavation. The
                      Supplementary ESIA will include a cultural heritage assessment covering the canal corridors, and the ESMPs will
                      include Chance Finds Procedures in accordance with ESS8. The project will also consider potential impacts of altered
                      water regimes and canal embankments on culturally significant landscapes, heritage structures, or religious sites
                      located along or near the corridor.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant as the project will not involve any financial intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                    Apr 06, 2026                                                                                                        Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)



                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             No
                       N/A


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               Yes
                       A Common Approach to E&S risk management across the three co-financing institutions — World Bank, AIIB, and ADB
                       — will be explored during preparation, with the aim of harmonizing E&S requirements, instruments, and coordinating
                       supervision and reporting arrangements. It is anticipated that the Full Mutual Reliance Framework (FMRF) with ADB,
                       and a co-financing agreement with AIIB will be applied. This will be agreed upon in coordination with AIIB and ADB
                       during project preparation. The delineation of E&S responsibilities among co-financiers, including the designation of a
                       lead institution for E&S supervision and disclosure, will be documented in the ESCP and any applicable co-financing
                       agreements.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     •        Supplementary ESIA and ESMPs: A Supplementary ESIA will be prepared covering; i) a new assessment for the
                     Chainat-Pasak Canal expansion, proportionate to its risk profile and aligned with ESF requirements, and ii) gap filling
                     measures for the completed national EIA for the Pasak-Gulf of Thailand Canal to address supplementary studies to



Public Disclosure
                     meet all ESS requirements. Two separate site-specific ESMPs for Chainat-Pasak Canal and Pasak-Gulf of Thailand Canal
                     will be prepared and included in the Supplementary ESIA. Spoil management will form part of the ESMPs and site-
                     specific spoil management plans will be prepared by contractors before civil works commence.
                     •        Labor Management Procedures (LMP): Covering all categories of project workers, OHS standards, Code of
                     Conduct, SEA/SH prevention, and a workers' grievance mechanism;
                     •        Critical Habitat Assessment (CHA): CHA assessment covering entire project and particularly focusing on KBAs,
                     mangroves, wetlands, and estuaries;
                     •        Resettlement Framework (RF) and and Resettlement Plans (RP): A RP incorporating a Livelihood Restoration
                     Plans (LRPs), will be prepared for the existing Chainat-Pasak canal , where engineering design is sufficiently advanced to
                     identify affected persons and define entitlements. A RF will be prepared prior to appraisal for the Pasak-Gulf of
                     Thailand Canal corridor, where the final alignment and resettlement footprint are not yet fully defined; a site-specific
                     RP will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before civil works commence on that corridor.
                      •       Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) with GRM: A SEP covering all stakeholder groups including vulnerable
                     populations, with a project-level GRM. SEA/SH mitigation measures will be integrated into both the LMP and SEP;
                     •        Dam Safety Assessment: The existing Rama VI barrage will be upgraded to regulate higher inflows from the
                     Chainat-Pasak canal improvement. A Dam safety assessment of Rama VI barrage will be conducted during preparation
                     to inform project design; and
                     •        Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP): Capturing all time-bound E&S commitments agreed
                     between the World Bank and the RID, including instruments to be finalized during implementation.




                    Apr 06, 2026                                                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Chao Phraya Flood Management Plan 2 (P510631)



                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Sanjay Pahuja                    Title:        Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                             Specialist

                      Email:                  spahuja@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Dzung Huy Nguyen                 Job Title:    Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                             Specialist

                      Email:                  dnguyen4@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Public Disclosure
                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                  Sanjay Pahuja, Dzung Huy Nguyen

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                         Oznur Oguz Kuntasal

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                Sarah Antwi Boasiako




                    Apr 06, 2026                                                                                           Page 9 of 9
