Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Resilient Infrastructure for Regional Economic Development and Job Creation - Salta (P510696)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01566




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Infrastructure for Regional Economic Development and Job Creation - Salta (P510696)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                         Operation ID                    Operation Name
                                                                                                                        Resilient Infrastructure for
                                                         LATIN AMERICA AND                                              Regional Economic
                          Argentina                                                     P510696
                                                         CARIBBEAN                                                      Development and Job
                                                                                                                        Creation - Salta
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date         Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         09-Feb-2026                    24-Mar-2026                     Transport
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Secretariat of Financing
                          Province of Salta              and Financial Planning,




_For Official Use Only_
                                                         Province of Salta

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          To enhance access to resilient infrastructure and increase institutional capacity in Salta to support economic
                          development and job creation in mining and related sectors, and to act effectively in case of an eligible crisis or
                          emergency.

                          Components
                          Component 1: Resilient road connectivity
                          Component 2: Development of infrastructure for logistics nodes
                          Component 3: Water and sanitation
                          Component 4: Strengthening mining sector governance and technical capacity
                          Component 5: Project management
                          Component 6: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
                          Front-End Fee

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                Yes

                          SUMMARY


                                                                                                                                                 Page 1



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Resilient Infrastructure for Regional Economic Development and Job Creation - Salta (P510696)



                             Total Operation Cost                                                                                               100.00

                             Total Financing                                                                                                    100.00
                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                       100.00
                             Financing Gap                                                                                                         0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                     100.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial




_For Official Use Only_
                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                          B. Introduction and Context
                          Country Context
                          1. Argentina’s regional economies face persistent connectivity and infrastructure gaps that constrain productive
                          capacity, job creation, and long-term growth. Economic activity remains heavily concentrated in the Buenos Aires
                          Metropolitan Area, while in many provinces, firms remain small and poorly integrated into regional or global value chains,
                          and growth and job creation are constrained by limited connectivity and institutional challenges. Yet provinces in
                          Patagonia and Northwestern Argentina hold significant untapped potential in strategic sectors such as tourism, mining,
                          fisheries, agriculture, and forestry.
                          Sectoral and Institutional Context
                          2. The Province of Salta holds significant potential in critical minerals (lithium and copper) and other productive value
                          chains that can help create jobs and promote sustainable development. However, Salta’s current connectivity and
                          infrastructure gaps imply high costs for the productive sectors and reduce their competitiveness. Several strategic
                          national roads remain in poor condition, and many are vulnerable to flooding. Rail carries only limited cargo, including
                          due to lack of multi-modal logistics facilities, thus increasing pressure on the road network and threatening road safety
                          as cargo flows are starting to surge as a result of the mining projects entering production. Warehousing and other logistics
                          services used by the mining firms are spatially scattered, implying low efficiency and high costs. Moreover, significant
                          gaps persist in access to basic infrastructure services, such as water and sanitation, in the communities close to the mining
                          areas. Finally, Salta’s mining sector still faces a set of institutional and information bottlenecks that risk constraining the
                          next wave of investment and its contribution to provincial development.


                                                                                                                                                    Page 2



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Resilient Infrastructure for Regional Economic Development and Job Creation - Salta (P510696)


                          3. The proposed operation seeks to address these constraints by (i) improving connectivity and access to resilient
                          infrastructure, (ii) expanding access to basic services in local communities, and (iii) strengthening institutional capacity
                          for mining sector management.
                          C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                          To enhance access to resilient infrastructure and increase institutional capacity in Salta to support economic
                          development and job creation in mining and related sectors, and to act effectively in case of an eligible crisis or
                          emergency.

                           Key Results
                            i.  Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (WBG
                                Scorecard)
                           ii.  People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (WBG Scorecard)
                          iii.  Sectoral plans/strategies adopted in the roads and water sectors (number)
                          iv.   Direct, indirect, and induced job-years created during the construction, operation, and maintenance of road
                                infrastructure, logistics nodes, and water and sanitation infrastructure (number)
                           v.   Incremental investment by logistics and mining sector firms enabled by the project (amount (USD))




_For Official Use Only_
                           D. Project Description

                          4. The project includes the following components:
                                 Component 1: Resilient road connectivity will support rehabilitation of national road (RN) 51 and strategic studies
                                 to promote private sector participation in the roads sector.
                                 Component 2: Development of infrastructure for logistics nodes will support infrastructure improvement of the
                                 General Güemes Logistics Node and Industrial Park and basic infrastructure investment and planning of the
                                 Olacapato Logistics Node.
                                 Component 3: Water and sanitation will finance infrastructure works in the localities of Olacapato (drinking water
                                 plant and new distribution works) and San Antonio de los Cobres (wastewater treatment plant) and a strategic
                                 study to improve water reuse in the province.
                                 Component 4: Strengthening mining sector governance and technical capacity will finance modernization of
                                 mining management and oversight; strengthening oversight capacities; and geological knowledge infrastructure.
                                 Component 5: Project management will finance the overall management of the Project by a Project
                                 Implementation Unit (PIU) and citizen engagement and outreach activities.
                                 Component 6. Contingent Emergency Response. Provide a mechanism for rapid reallocation of project funds in
                                 response to an eligible crisis or emergency.
                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate




                                                                                                                                                  Page 3



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Resilient Infrastructure for Regional Economic Development and Job Creation - Salta (P510696)


                           Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

                          5. The combined Environmental and Social (E&S) Risk is classified as Substantial. The project will finance medium- to
                          large-scale infrastructure with potential indirect and/or cumulative impacts on biodiversity and water. While most works
                          are planned on existing roads or fiscal land, minimizing land acquisition, project activities in selected sites may cause
                          physical/economic displacement. The presence of Indigenous Peoples requires prioritizing measures to avoid and
                          mitigate adverse impacts while ensuring equitable benefit-sharing. Labor influx from other localities may heighten the
                          need for vigilance around risks of sexual exploitation and abuse, and sexual harassment. The Puna area is highly sensitive
                          to environmental pressures, and the region’s high poverty and unmet basic needs increase the risk of inequitable benefit
                          distribution. Finally, while the mining component is intended to strengthen environmental and social oversight, it may
                          nevertheless lead to concerns among certain local stakeholders.
                          6. These potential impacts will be addressed through sub-project design, construction planning, and mitigation




_For Official Use Only_
                          measures embedded in E&S risk management instruments. The PIU is responsible for preparing, consulting on,
                          disclosing, and securing World Bank clearance of the Environmental and Social Management Framework, Stakeholder
                          Engagement Plan, and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework.
                          E. Implementation
                          Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                          7. The Borrower of the proposed project is the Province of Salta, with the Argentine Republic as Guarantor. The
                          provincial Ministry of Economy and Finance, through the Secretariat of Finance and Financial Planning, will serve as the
                          main implementing and coordinating agency of the project. It will host the PIU, which will be responsible for overall
                          coordination, financial management, procurement, E&S risk management, and monitoring and evaluation. The PIU will
                          work in close collaboration with the relevant provincial agencies for the execution of sector-specific activities. On issues
                          related to indigenous communities in the project area, the PIU will coordinate with the provincial Secretariat of
                          Indigenous Affairs and Social Development. A Project Operational Manual, to be adopted prior to effectiveness, will
                          specify fiduciary procedures, E&S standards, and coordination mechanisms across project Components.
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                            Aiga Stokenberga
                            Senior Transport Economist

                            Javier Aguilar
                            Senior Mining Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient



                                                                                                                                                  Page 4



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Infrastructure for Regional Economic Development and Job Creation - Salta (P510696)


                           Province of Salta

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Secretariat of Financing and Financial Planning, Province of Salta

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL




_For Official Use Only_
                          Task Team Leader(s):                      Aiga Stokenberga, Javier Aguilar

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:                 Bianca Bianchi Alves                  15-Jan-2026

                          Country Director:                         Cristina Isabel Panasco Santos        09-Feb-2026




                                                                                                                                       Page 5



                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
