Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 06/13/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05007




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jun 18, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510690                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        SEADRM II                  2026

                     Operation Name            LAO PDR SOUTHEAST ASIA DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PROJECT II

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Lao People's              Lao People's Democratic Republic          EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC      Urban, Resilience and
                     Democratic Republic                                                                            Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                     Lao People's              Department of Planning - Ministry of      15-Oct-2025                12-Mar-2026
                     Democratic Republic       Planning and Investment, Department
                     (Lao PDR)                 of State-Owned Enterprises and
                                               Insurance Supervision (SOEI) - Ministry
                                               of Finance, Department of Waterways



Public Disclosure
                                               - Ministry of Public Works and
                                               Transport, Department of Meteorology
                                               and Hydrology - Ministry of Natural
                                               Resources and Environment

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     10-Jun-2025               60,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Enhance flood resilience in target areas and strengthen the Government’s capacity for hydro-meteorological services
                     and financing post-disaster response.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities

                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                     The proposed project takes an integrated approach to disaster risk management, supporting activities across the four
                     thematic areas of flood risk management (including nature-based solutions), early warning systems, disaster risk
                     finance, and mainstreaming disaster risk management. Structured around four components, the first component will
                     include infrastructure investments in flood risk management in several strategically selected provinces across Lao PDR
                     and analytical studies to improve resilient urban planning in high risk areas. Component 2 will improve the delivery of
                     weather, climate, and hydrological services by upgrading monitoring equipment and technology for
                     hydrometeorological hazards and providing capacity building to support operation and maintenance and early warning
                     dissemination and communication activities. Component 3 will provide payment of the disaster risk insurance premium
                     to facilitate continued access to sovereign risk insurance and strengthen financial resilience to natural disasters through
                     several technical assistance activities. And Component 4 will strengthen the mainstreaming of DRM in planning and
                     investment and support overall project management and coordination.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Building on SEADRM I, SEADRM II is designed and implemented as a multi-sectoral flood and climate risk management
                     operation. Sub-component 1.1 will continue to support flood protection infrastructure such as riverbank protection
                     embankments, canal improvements, water gates with pumping stations, river-side parks and tree-planting across
                     Oudomxay (ODX), Luang Prabang (LPB), and other priority provinces. Sub-component 1.2 will support technical and
                     analytical studies to support integrated urban flood risk management in other priority areas such as Luang Namtha
                     (LNT) and Vientiane Capital City (VCC). It will also explore options to pilot priority drainage investments and wetland
                     restoration activities in selected locations. While most of the project activities will be situated in flood-prone urban and



Public Disclosure
                     peri-urban areas where landscapes have been modified. Some project activities are proposed in the potentially
                     degraded ecologically sensitive wetlands but not designated as any legal status of protected area or part of RAMSAR
                     Convention, and the Mekong mainstream river and its tributaries. In LPB, a UNESCO World Heritage site, cultural
                     heritage sensitivities will require special attention due to its unique historical and social significance. The Component 5
                     (CERC) will provide funding for immediate response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency caused natural or
                     man-made disasters.
                     As for the social project setting, Muang Xay (ODX) has around 32,000 residents; and LPB town overs 56,000 residents.
                     ODX is home to multiple ethnic groups, mainly Khmu and Hmong, who meet the ESS7 definition of IPs. Vulnerable
                     populations, including ethnic households and informal settlers along riverbanks, may be affected by resettlement, land
                     acquisition, economic displacement, or reduced access to river-based resources. In addition, women, people with
                     disabilities, and the elderly may encounter barriers to receiving early warning information or participating in
                     consultations.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The lead implementing agency will be the Department of Planning (DOP) under the Ministry of Planning and Investment
                     (MPI), which will be responsible for overall project management and coordination. Component 1 will be implemented
                     by the Department of Waterways (DOW) under the Ministry of Public Works and Transport (MPWT), with technical
                     support on environmental and social (E&S) compliance from the Public Works and Transport Institute (PTI). Component
                     2 will be implemented by the Department of Meteorology and Hydrology (DMH) under the Ministry of Agriculture and
                     Environment (MAE), while the Ministry of Finance (MOF) will implement Component 3 and Component 4.
                     MPWT has extensive experience implementing World Bank-financed projects under the World Bank’s (WB)
                     environmental and social safeguards policy including the ongoing SEADRM I Project (P160930). The PTI of MPWT has

                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                     extensive experience with WB road projects implemented under the safeguards policies as well as Environmental and
                     Social Framework (ESF) and is currently involved in the implementation of the Southeast Asia Regional Economic
                     Corridor and Connectivity Project (SEARECC) and the Lao PDR Climate Resilient Road Connectivity Improvement Project
                     (CRRCIP) under the WB ESF. Agencies including DMH, MPI, and SOEI/MOF have limited exposure to ESF requirements.
                     Such Ministries new to the ESF will require capacity strengthening and E&S staffing to support implementation of ESF
                     related activities. The project will assign dedicated focal persons for ESF and will hire E&S consultants to support ESF
                     implementation for each PIU, capacity building for national and provincial levels, and include ESF implementation
                     procedures in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). Hands-on implementation support missions from the Bank
                     during the first 12 months will reinforce capacity.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                        Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                 Substantial
                     The environmental risk is assessed to be Substantial due to the potential risks and impacts from the construction of
                     flood protection infrastructure, canal improvements, water gates, river-side parks and tree-planting across ODX, LPB,
                     and other priority provinces. The project will also explore options to pilot priority drainage investments and wetland
                     restoration activities in selected locations. These interventions are expected to generate more positive environmental
                     outcomes; however, they may also result in site-specific environmental risks and impacts, including soil erosion,
                     sedimentation, pollution (air, water, noise), community and worker health and safety risks, and threats to sensitive



Public Disclosure
                     habitat of some aquatic species along the Mekong mainstream and its tributaries, and the targeted wetland. Activities
                     may interact with riverine ecosystems and drainage patterns, potentially altering natural hydrology if not carefully
                     managed. Some sites, such as LPB, require additional attention due to cultural heritage sensitivity and potential
                     ecological sensitivity of the degraded wetland. Additionally, there may be risks related to the location of construction
                     activities in areas with Unexploded Ordnance (UXO) which will require careful screening and clearance protocols.
                     Component 2 will support the upgrade of existing hydrometeorological stations, ICT systems and capacity building;
                     while these are expected to have limited environmental impacts, they might require consideration of electronic waste
                     management. Relevant requirements under the ESF will be applied to avoid, minimize, and mitigate potential adverse
                     environmental impacts. For the E&S risk management under the CERC financed activities, a CERC Addendum to the
                     ESMF and a CERC Manual will be prepared and disclosed immediately after project effectiveness, and the ESCP will
                     include provisions for them.
                                                                                                                                   Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk is rated as Substantial, primarily due to the nature and scale of civil works under the Component 1 that
                     will likely involve and require land resettlement and economic displacement, generate work-related risks and impacts
                     on local communities including the vulnerable and ethnic minority groups identified as IPs in ODX province
                     particularly those living along riverbanks, drainage canals and wetland area. Potential impacts on these project
                     affected people (PAP) also include disruptions and access restriction to water resources which their livelihood partly
                     rely on. The vulnerable groups to be potentially affected by the project activities include the poor, women-headed
                     households, and elderly persons, People with Disability, a group of Lesbian, Gays, Bio-sexual and Transgender (LGBT)
                     and displaced persons or informal settlers who may lack formal land titles. Khmu and Hmong ethnic groups (IPs) are


                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                     present in ODX and may be affected either directly or indirectly. These ethic groups may face language and cultural
                     barriers to participation, consultation, and access to information and early warning systems. In LPB, a UNESCO World
                     Heritage City, works may affect cultural heritage (CH) both tangible and intangible, local communities living in
                     heritage-sensitive areas where cultural norms and practices need to be carefully observed. Additional risks include
                     community heath and safety (CHS) risks and impacts associated with the construction works and labor influx (traffic
                     and road safety, safety at construction sites, dust and noise, communicable diseases, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
                     and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH), disturbance to local communities and tourism businesses in LPB, and challenges in
                     ensuring inclusive and meaningful engagement across diverse groups.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The project involves civil work and other activities with potential E&S risks and impacts that require careful screening,
                      assessment, and management to meet ESS1 requirements. E&S impacts associated with the civil works include
                      resettlement, land acquisition, economic displacement, OHS, CHS, risk associated with labor influx (SEA/SH) and
                      challenge to engagement of vulnerable groups, including ethnic minorities. Considering the lessons learned from the
                      implementation of E&S safeguards policies under the first phase, ESF instruments will be prepared and implemented
                      under the SEADRMII. The ESF instruments to be prepared prior to project appraisal include ESCP, SEP, ESMF and RPF
                      to manage E&S risk under activities to be identified during the project implementation. For the sub-project in ODX, a



Public Disclosure
                      SS-ESMP, ARAP and EGDP will be prepared prior to the project effectiveness. A CERC Addendum to the ESMF and a
                      CERC Manual will be prepared after project effectiveness.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      The project will affect and involve diverse groups of stakeholders, including urban communities, ethnic minorities,
                      informal settlers, and small businesses. The Borrower will prepare a SEP to ensure inclusive, culturally appropriate
                      engagement and a functional grievance redress mechanism (GRM), including GRM for the local villages and ethnic
                      groups, SEA/SH-sensitive channels, and GRM for project workers (as part of the LMP). Education, Information, and
                      Communication (IEC) materials will be developed in Lao and relevant ethnic languages to be used during community
                      consultation and information dissemination will also be tailored for ethnic groups and illiterate individuals. The GRM
                      will include community-based entry points and confidential SEA/SH reporting. Special attention will be given to
                      women, ethnic groups, and vulnerable households. All ESF instruments will be consulted and disclosed both online
                      and locally in accessible formats.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The project involves direct workers (government and PMU/PIU staff), contracted workers (for civil works and
                      supervision), and primary supply workers, and community workers who may be hired by the work contractors. Key
                      labor risks include occupational health and safety (OHS) incidents from use of heavy and sharp machinery, exposure
                      to hazardous materials, water safety-related risks, employment discrimination, SEA/SH, Violence against Children
                      (VAC), and child labor. LMP will be prepared as part of the ESMF prior to appraisal to manage risks in accordance with


                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                      ESS2 and national Labor Law (2023). The LMP will outline measure on fair treatment, OHS, terms of employment,
                      grievance redress, and protection of vulnerable and ethnic workers. Contractors will be required to prepare site-
                      specific labor procedures, provide training, PPE, necessary facilities and establish and implement GRM. The LMP will
                      address risks related to primary supply workers and include COC preventing SEA/SH risks.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      The project will involve construction activities including extraction of construction materials (stone/gravel, soil and
                      sand) that may generate dust, noise, exhaust emissions from machinery, and pollution from improper waste disposal
                      or fuel leakage. Movement of heavy machinery and construction activities could also cause significant soil
                      disturbance that may exacerbate soil erosion. Guidance will be provided in the ESMF to outline measures to avoid
                      and minimize such impacts, including guidance on resource efficiency and pollution prevention for all components.
                      The sourcing of construction materials will prioritize licensed quarries and borrow pits. Establishment of new sites in
                      protected or ecologically sensitive areas, productive land, or forest zones will be prohibited. The project will ensure
                      that pollution prevention, waste handling, and response measures are provided as part of SS-ESMP and C-ESMP and
                      in place prior to the commencement of civil works.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      Potential CHS risks include traffic disruptions, road safety hazards, dust, noise and reduced access to rivers and wat
                      used for daily livelihood activities (e.g., washing, bathing, fishing). Labor influx may elevate risks of SEA/SH, and
                      potential risk of communicable diseases (air, wastewater born, sexually transmitted diseases). SS-ESMP will include




Public Disclosure
                      measures to manage the risks due to community exposure to construction and labor influx related risks, such as
                      signage, traffic management plans, public awareness, heath care protocols, grievance mechanism and emergency
                      response procedures. Site layout and construction techniques and timing will consider patterns and needs for
                      community livelihood and tourists. SEA/SH risk mitigation will include Codes of Conduct, SEA/SH training and
                      awareness activities, and a confidential, survivor-centered grievance mechanism for SEA/SH victims. Infrastructure
                      designs will integrate universal access requirements.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant due to expected resettlement, land acquisition, and other types of economic displacement from civil
                      works under Component 1 especially those households along riverbanks. Affected households and persons (APs and
                      APs) will be eligible for compensation and livelihood restoration as per the ESS5. RPF will be prepared prior to
                      appraisal to guide resettlement planning for those sub-projects with design and scope of impacts still to be finalized.
                      A site-specific RAP or ARAP will be prepared for each subproject with land acquisition and resettlement inevitable.
                      For the work-sub-project in ODX where design and location are confirmed, an ARAP will be prepared, consulted, and
                      disclosed before project effectiveness. The ESCP will define responsibilities and timelines. The Borrower will be
                      responsible for financing both compensation and livelihood restoration.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The construction of riverbank protection works are not anticipated to occur within critical habitats, although exact
                      locations are not yet confirmed. However, flood risk management structures may cause localized impacts on aquatic


                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                      biodiversity, including disruption of habitats, migratory routes, and changes in water quality. Construction of
                      riverbank protection may also result in the loss of bank-side vegetation. The proposed wetlands restoration may
                      affect an ecologically sensitive area; however, the areas are not designated as any legal status of protected area or
                      part of RAMSAR Convention, and the intervention is expected to result in positive ecological outcomes over the long
                      term. The risks to biodiversity and aquatic ecosystems will be assessed, along with proposed measures to avoid,
                      minimize, and mitigate potential impacts. Any activity in ecologically sensitive areas will be prohibited.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is relevant as ethnic groups of Khmu and Hmong meeting the ESS7 criteria are present in ODX province. These
                      groups maintain distinct cultural identities and languages, and may face barriers to participation, access to
                      information, and benefits. The Borrower will prepare a site-specific Ethnic Group Engagement Plan (EGEP) for ODX
                      based on the version successfully implemented under the original project. The EGDP will provide inclusive approach
                      to enhancing ethnic households and community engagement and ensure their access to project information and
                      benefit. It will include requirement and procedures for grievance redress mechanism (GRM) tailored to each of the
                      Hmong and Khmu ethnic groups. Where necessary, community engagement and consultation will be conducted by
                      facilitators fluent in local languages and informed by cultural practices to ensure meaningful consultation and
                      participation. The ESCP will outline responsibilities and timelines for preparation and implementation.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      The project includes civil works that may affect tangible or intangible cultural heritage in the project sites particularly
                      in Luang Prabang, a UNESCO World Heritage. The ESMF will includes a CHIA guidelines and templates, including
                      screening procedures, impact assessment and mitigation measures, to avoid or minimize potential impacts on the
                      tangible and intangible. A CHMP based on Cultural Heritage Impacts Assessment will be developed for Luang Prabang
                      site in close collaboration and consultation with UNESCO through its Cultural Heritage Offices based in Luang Prabang
                      City, Ministry of Information and Culture (Department for Heritage) and relevant local authority and communities.
                      Site-specific ESMP will include chance find procedures, and any physical works in or near heritage zones will require
                      consultation with UNESCO, Department of Heritage, local authorities, businesses and communities to ensure
                      culturally appropriate planning and risk mitigation.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                No




                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                         Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                       The Borrower's E&S Framework will not be used for the Project, in whole or in part. Nevertheless, where relevant and
                       applicable, provisions in the national legislations will be recognized and referred to in the ESF instruments to be
                       prepared and applied under the project.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                       The World Bank has held discussions with several development partners regarding potential co-financing for SEADRM
                       Phase 2. Among them, AIIB has expressed strong interest and requested the World Bank to explore the Government's
                       willingness to borrow from AIIB for the project. At this stage, it is not yet confirmed whether AIIB or any other partner
                       will engage through co-financing or parallel financing. The potential for a Common Approach will be revisited and
                       clarified prior to project appraisal.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Actions to be completed prior to Project Appraisal:
                     1. Preparation, and disclosure of the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     2. Preparation, consultation, and disclosure of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) with Grievance Redress
                     Mechanism.
                     3. Preparation, consultation, and disclosure of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) including
                     Labor Management Procedure (LMP), environmental and social screening tool, Site Specific Environmental and Social



Public Disclosure
                     Management Plan (SS-ESMP) and Contractor ESMP guidelines and templates; and Cultural Heritage Management Plan
                     (CHMP) guideline and template for Luang Prabang sub-project.
                     4. Preparation, consultation, and disclosure of the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
                     5. Update and redisclose of ESMF and RPF.

                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     •       Set up institutional arrangement for the preparation and implementation of ESF related activities prior to
                     project appraisal.
                     •       Conduct ESIA and develop SS-ESMP for other sites once locations and activities are confirmed.
                     •       Conduct Cultural Heritage Impact Assessment for Luang Prabang in close collaboration with UNESCO or other
                     heritage-sensitive areas before sub-project implementation.
                     •       Preparation, consultation and disclosure of site-specific instruments for Oudomxay sub-project including
                     Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), SS-ESMP, Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and Ethnic Group
                     Engagement Plan before effectiveness.
                     •       Set up a monitoring and reporting mechanism for ESF related activities, and
                     •       Prepare and implement capacity building and training on ESF requirements before project activities start and
                     throughout project lifetime.


                     III. CONTACT POINT



                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                       Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Lao Pdr Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management Project Ii (P510690)



                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Veronique Marie Morin Floissac      Title:         Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                 Specialist

                      Email:                  vmorin@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Hemang D. Karelia                   Job Title:     Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                 Specialist

                      Email:                  hkarelia@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Thu Hang Vu                         Job Title:     Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                  tvu4@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


Public Disclosure
                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                    Veronique Marie Morin Floissac, Hemang D. Karelia, Thu Hang Vu

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:           Viengkeo Phetnavongxay

                     ADM Social Specialist:                  Sybounheuang Phandanouvong




                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                      Page 9 of 9
