Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Parana Water Security Project (P510227)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 09/16/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05168




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 24, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510227                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       Parana-PSH                   2026

                     Operation Name            Parana Water Security Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Brazil                    Brazil                                   LATIN AMERICA AND            Water
                                                                                        CARIBBEAN

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     State of Parana           State Secretariat of Planning - SEPL     17-Nov-2025                  25-May-2026


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     04-Sep-2025               263,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Strengthen the Borrower's capacity to collaboratively manage water security risks in a changing climate and to reduce
                     those risks in selected areas of the Borrower's territory by implementing integrated, cross-sectoral interventions.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     To achieve its objective, the Project will focus on three interrelated topics: (a) the integrated management of water
                     resources, which is the foundation of water security for people, the economy and biodiversity as water is a shared and
                     finite resource; (b) the water security for agriculture production, the main driver of Parana’s economy, and, at the same
                     time, the reduction of agriculture contribution to water security risks and (c) the water security for potable water supply
                     to support the universalization goal, while reducing WSS contributions to water security risks. The two priority areas are
                     the Northwest region of the state and the Alto Iguaçu watershed. The Northwest region has the driest climate and is
                     mostly covered with sandy soils, vulnerable to erosion and with low water storage capacity. This is the area where the

                    Sep 24, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     agriculture production suffers the most in times of drought, where irrigation is expanding rapidly and where many
                     water sources for urban water are at risk of contamination or deficits. The second area is the Alto Iguaçu watershed
                     where the Metropolitan area is located, which is water stressed and highly polluted due to high water demand and
                     contaminant loads from the Metropolitan area. In both areas, water security challenges have been exacerbated by
                     climate change.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Paraná (PR) is one of Brazil’s most economically dynamic states, with 11.44 million inhabitants and contributing 6.1% to
                     the national GDP. The state’s HDI reached 0.769 in 2021, and its average household per capita income ranks sixth
                     nationally. PR also has relatively low income inequality, with a Gini Index of 0.463 (fourth lowest in Brazil). Poverty and
                     extreme poverty rates remain significant at 20.0% and 2.3%. Despite these achievements, PR faces persistent challenges
                     in water resource management, impacting urban supply and agricultural sustainability. Climate change has intensified
                     these issues, causing prolonged droughts and concentrated rainfall. Rural areas, especially those dominated by family
                     farming, are particularly vulnerable. Only 28% of rural households have piped water, and just 21% have adequate
                     sewage coverage. Water use efficiency in agriculture remains low. Family farmers represent 75% of PR’s 305,154
                     agricultural landholdings and are increasingly susceptible to climate variability, as their livelihoods depend on rain-fed
                     crops. Recent droughts led to a 39% reduction in agricultural output during the 2021/22 harvest. The Northwest region
                     is especially affected due to porous soils, limited surface water, and pressure on underground sources. The project
                     targets regions with insufficient water balance, a history of production losses, and potential conflicts over water use.
                     Priority areas are selected based on socioeconomic criteria, focusing on vulnerable and culturally distinct groups. PR is



Public Disclosure
                     home to at least 181 traditional communities—including indigenous peoples (Guarani, Xetá, Kaingang), quilombolas,
                     peasant, and artisanal fishing communities—whose territories cover 310,556 hectares. PR hosts diverse biomes, with
                     the Atlantic Forest, Pampas areas and remnants of Mixed Ombrophilous Forest, and has 73 Conservation Units
                     catalogued by IAT, protecting over 26.3 km². Only about 10% of the original forest remains, mainly in the north and
                     Serra do Mar.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project Management Unit (PMU) will be headquartered at Paraná State Planning Secretariat (SEPL), with functions
                     of coordination, procurement, financial management, environmental and social risk management, and monitoring.
                     Each executor – Paraná Rural Development Institute (IDR), SANEPAR, IAT and Agricultural Defense Agency of Paraná
                     (ADAPAR) – will have a Project Implementation Unit (UIP) composed of a team focused on the execution of project
                     activities and focal points to work together with PMU in technical functions, bidding, financial management,
                     environmental and social risk management, monitoring.
                     These agencies have extensive experience in key areas for project implementation: rural extension and training,
                     domestic sanitation and waste management, adaptation of rural roads and promotion of efficient use of water for
                     irrigation and agricultural models, water monitoring; certification and inspection of the soil and use of agrochemicals,
                     monitoring and environmental compensation for water production.
                     SEPL, IAT, and IDR have previous experience with both the World Bank’s safeguards operational policies and the
                     Environmental and Social Standards, as they have been involved on the implementation of the Parana Rural Poverty
                     Alleviation & Natural Resources Management Project (P037828), the SWAP for Parana Multi-sector Development
                     Project (P126343) and the Parana Public Sector Modernization and Innovation for Service Delivery Operation (P168634).


                    Sep 24, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     During preparation, the task team will assess the Borrower’s capacity for managing the environmental and social risks of
                     the Project in a manner consistent with the objectives of the ESSs.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                 Moderate
                     The environmental risk is Moderate. The project’s main environmental risks stem from constructing drainage and
                     erosion-control works, wetlands and water intakes, installing waste treatment systems, and deploying irrigation
                     infrastructure. To address these, the project incorporates sustainable technologies, including nature-based solutions,
                     low-impact irrigation, and integrated watershed management, along with networks to monitor both water quality
                     and quantity. The project is of moderate scale and complexity. Its risks and impacts are predictable, temporary and/or
                     reversible, and can be effectively mitigated using standard measures and good international practice. The potential
                     implementation areas appear to be largely human-modified rural landscapes. The Borrower has a robust
                     environmental framework at both national and state levels. Higher-impact activities will undergo three-stage licensing
                     with detailed ESIAs and tailored mitigation. Initial reviews of dam safety documents by the task team indicate that the
                     Borrower has the information needed to comply with ESS4, Annex A. Key Environmental risks: soil erosion and
                     sedimentation; altered aquatic habitats from intakes/flow regulation; contamination from solid waste/effluents;
                     hydrological cycle changes from major catchment works; deforestation/loss of native vegetation; and cumulative
                     water-use/pressure conflicts/overextraction from irrigation. Mitigation: soil conservation and native revegetation;



Public Disclosure
                     ESIAs and minimum ecological flows; water quality monitoring and efficient wastewater/solid waste treatment;
                     hydrology-based planning and nature-based restoration; compensatory measures (e.g., reforestation) and compliance
                     with environmental laws; efficient irrigation. Also: water availability studies, user regularization, and
                     groundwater/surface-water monitoring. Given the project’s preliminary stage, further assessments—including an
                     ESMF—will refine and confirm risks and inform mitigation.
                                                                                                                                  Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk is provisionally rated as Substantial because, at least on a conceptual basis, it is likely that: •The
                     management and allocation of water for distinct uses may a) generate competition among water users (especially in
                     areas of water scarcity) and b) face challenges to ensure the participation of culturally distinct/vulnerable social
                     groups in River Basin Committees, the State Council of Water Resources, and other decision-making instances, leading
                     to resistance/lack of support to state policies and programs and the potential capture of their benefits by more
                     influential actors. •The most vulnerable family farmers may face greater challenges to benefit from irrigation
                     programs and adopt new water management/productive practices. •The deployment of wetlands and drainage works
                     for flood/erosion control may require land acquisition, potentially causing involuntary resettlement. •The protection
                     of springs and water sources may restrict access to land/natural resources. Despite their diversity, these risks are
                     expected to be of moderate magnitude and can be mitigated through the following well-known and effective
                     measures incorporated in Project design: •A participatory and inclusive approach to WRM, involving all stakeholders
                     in decision-making, to be reflected in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan. •The prioritization of investments vulnerable
                     rural communities for sanitation/water supply infrastructure, ensuring their engagement from planning to
                     implementation through public consultations, participation forums, and awareness campaigns. •The offer of technical


                    Sep 24, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     training and access to irrigation technologies for vulnerable family farmers. The development of a Resettlement Policy
                     Framework fully in line with ESS5 for ensuring proper compensation of adverse impacts from land acquisition and
                     participation of communities and individuals who may face more stringent restrictions on land and natural resource
                     uses in the design and implementation of such activities.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The project targets reduced agricultural losses, increased productivity, improved rural water and sanitation and less
                      erosion. Climate co-benefits will come from adaptation and mitigation in water, agriculture, and sanitation, with a
                      focus on resilience. Environmental risks include waste, pollution, safety, biodiversity loss, resource use and erosion.
                      Social risks include land acquisition/restriction, livelihood impacts, cultural heritage, labor influx, GBV/SEA, and
                      effects on vulnerable groups. An ESMF is proposed to address identified risks, covering ESS2-10, baseline data, direct
                      and cumulative impact assessment and the use of the mitigation hierarchy. Specific plans and studies should be
                      developed, per ESMF and Brazilian E&S licensing. An ESCP will outline actions to manage E&S risks, with monitoring
                      and reporting. A PMU will coordinate daily with different agencies handling E&S management. Borrower capacity and
                      framework consistency with ESF will be assessed and supported as need.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      The Project involves a multiplicity of stakeholders and – at least conceptually – the competition between different
                      water users and the exclusion of more vulnerable social groups from planning and decision-making processes must be
                      considered as potential Project risks. Dealing with such risks, existing multistakeholder instances for participation are
                      involved in Project design and implementation (such as the State Councils of Rural Development and Water
                      Resources, the CPCT, and the River Basin Committees) and the Project will develop and adopt a SEP considering the
                      different needs of distinct stakeholders, the previous experience of the executing agencies in disclose information
                      and carry out meaningful consultations. The SEP will also put in place a continued stakeholder engagement strategy,
                      procedures for preventing benefits from being captured by more influential actors and monitoring equitable access to
                      project benefits, and an accessible multi-channel grievance mechanism.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The project will engage direct and contracted workers who will be involved in various types of activity, some involving
                      the use of heavy machinery, others open work, others the risk of road accidents. It is not expected to involve people
                      employed or engaged by the Borrower’s primary suppliers or employed or engaged in providing community labor to
                      perform work related to its core functions. It is not possible to estimate the number of workers simultaneously
                      involved in the multiple activities, but it is not expected that there will be a large temporary influx of workers in the
                      same place or for an extended period. Brazilian labor legislation and occupational health and safety standards are
                      well aligned with the requirements of ESS 2 and – with a few additional measures related with the provision of a
                      project-specific multi-channel grievance mechanism for project workers – will allow for results materially consistent
                      with its objectives.


                    Sep 24, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant to this project as it involves activities related to water resources management, agriculture, and water
                      supply and sanitation, which have the potential to consume resources and generate pollution. Key considerations will
                      include water efficiency, management of agricultural pollution (including agrochemicals and animal waste), and the
                      potential for GHG emissions from agricultural practices and wastewater treatment. The project will incorporate
                      resource efficiency and pollution prevention measures in line with WBG EHS Guidelines and GIIP. These measures will
                      be assessed and detailed in the project's ESMF and potentially in specific management plans (e.g., Waste
                      Management Plan). The project will prioritize non-chemical pest control methods and the ESMF will include
                      Integrated Pest Management Plan; if chemicals are necessary, their use will strictly adhere to WBG EHS Guidelines for
                      toxicity and safety.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      ESS4 applies due to potential community health, safety, and security impacts from project activities. The project aims
                      to protect ecosystem services and reduce community health risks; any temporary labor influx is expected to be
                      minor. Northwest irrigation subprojects will use groundwater and surface water. Four Sanepar dams lie upstream of
                      the wetlands. Sanepar maintains Dam Safety and Emergency Action Plans, implemented, monitored, and reported
                      biannually to IAT by a multidisciplinary team of engineers, geologists, environmental and dam safety specialists.
                      During preparation, the task team will assess whether the wetlands depend on these dams. The ESMF will include
                      measures to ensure ESS4 dam safety compliance, address potential adverse impacts, and ensure security personnel
                      are trained in proper conduct and use of force.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                 Relevant

                      Some works for the deployment of wetlands and flood and erosion control in peri-urban areas will need land
                      acquisition and may cause adverse impacts related to involuntary resettlement. Protection of water springs and
                      water courses may impose restrictions on land and natural resource uses. The Borrower will develop and adopt a
                      Resettlement Policy Framework to be expanded on Resettlement/Livelihood Restoration Plans to address involuntary
                      resettlement impacts according to the requirements of ESS 5, including inter alia a methodology for determining
                      replacement cost and ensuring participation of affected people. It will also define the participatory processes through
                      which communities and individuals who may face more stringent restrictions on land and natural resource uses will
                      be engaged in identifying any adverse impacts, assessing the significance of impacts, and establishing of the criteria
                      for eligibility for any mitigating or compensating measures necessary.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                  Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 applies to this project, which aims to strengthen water security in Paraná by advancing sustainable water
                      resources management, improving agricultural water security, and expanding access to potable water. Planned
                      activities include constructing a water canal and managing wetlands, which may affect natural habitats. The project
                      promotes sustainable agriculture and reduces water pollution, directly benefiting biodiversity and natural resource
                      management. Key risks include impacts on riparian vegetation, wetlands, and water quality, with possible
                      consequences for aquatic species and ecosystem services. The ESMF will set criteria to avoid or mitigate habitat
                      fragmentation and incorporate biodiversity assessments using international standards (e.g., IUCN). Effects on

                    Sep 24, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                      protected areas, habitat classification, and targeted mitigation—such as preventing invasive alien species—will be
                      developed and integrated into the ESMF and ESCP.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                 Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      Indigenous Peoples in Paraná count for 0.27% of the state population (30,460 people). They are mostly from the
                      Guarani, Kaingang and Xetá peoples. Nearly 46% of them live in 17 demarcated lands and are represented in the
                      State Council of Traditional Peoples and Communities of the State of Paraná (CPCT, Law 17,425/2012), in charge of
                      enabling their participation in public policies. Only the Xetá people live in the Northwest of Paraná (Ivaí Indigenous
                      Reserve) and Project activities are not expected to interfere with this land. As part of the Technical Assistance
                      activities, the Project shall ensure Indigenous Peoples are engaged in the updating of the State Water Resources Plan,
                      the Hydrographic Basin Plans and the Rural Sanitation Policy. Thus, the ESMF, the SEP and the ESCP will incorporate
                      the requirements of ESS7 to ensure proper assessment of the TAs downstream effects on IPs, meaningful
                      consultations with IPs and their equitable access to benefits.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                           Relevant

                      Some works supported by the Project will include excavations, demolition, movement of earth, flooding or other
                      changes in the physical environment and the Project’s ESMF will develop a chance finds procedure as required under
                      ESS 8 and the country’s law. As part of the environmental and social assessment of each subproject, the Borrower will
                      determine the presence of listed legally protected cultural heritage areas, recognized and unrecognized archeological




Public Disclosure
                      sites, built heritage and natural features imbued with cultural heritage that may be affected by the project. In such a
                      case, the Borrower will identify this tangible cultural heritage – through research and consultation with project-
                      affected parties – and make all efforts feasible to protect and preserve them in their existing location. Given the
                      scope of its activities, the Project will not use cultural (tangible or intangible) heritage of project affected parties for
                      commercial purposes.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                     Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                      No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            In Part
                       During project preparation, the task team will consider the use of Borrower Framework (BESF) on aspects related with
                       environmental and social impact assessment processes, labor and working conditions (including OHS standards),
                       pollution prevention and management, community health and safety, land expropriation and involuntary
                       resettlement, biodiversity conservation, indigenous peoples consultation, the protection of cultural heritage and
                       stakeholder engagement. A decision on using the BESF in each one of these areas will be justified in the Appraisal-


                    Sep 24, 2025                                                                                                          Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                       ESRS, which will also set additional and complementary measures to be adopted by the Project for achieving results
                       materially consistent with the objectives of the ESSs. It is expected the Borrower will have to develop a Resettlement
                       Policy Framework to address gaps between ESS 5 and BESF.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     During project preparation, the Borrower will prepare:
                     1) An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the primary and most appropriate instrument for E&S
                     assessment given that the project comprises a series of subprojects whose risks and impacts cannot be determined
                     until their details are defined;
                     - A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP);
                     - A Resettlement Policy Framework.
                     The Borrower will also disclose project information to enable stakeholders to understand the project’s risks, impacts,
                     and opportunities, and will conduct consultations with key stakeholders. These consultations will use both existing
                     participatory mechanisms for policy decision-making and online channels, which are proportionate and suitable for
                     early-stage engagement when subprojects are not yet fully defined.



Public Disclosure    III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Marie-Laure Lajaunie                    Title:         Lead Water Resources Management
                                                                                                    Specialist

                      Email:                 Mlajaunie@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Irene Natalia Wasilevsky                Job Title:     Senior Agriculture Economist

                      Email:                 iwasilevsky@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Sep 24, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                           Marie-Laure Lajaunie, Irene Natalia Wasilevsky

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                  Ana Carolina Rodrigues Velloso Cordeiro

                     ADM Social Specialist:                         Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa




Public Disclosure




                    Sep 24, 2025                                                                                     Page 9 of 9
