Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in the Water and Waste Sectors (P510667)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 15-Jul-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01331




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in the Water and Waste Sectors (P510667)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
Pakistan                       P510667                     Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in the Water and
                                                           Waste Sectors
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
SOUTH ASIA                     10-Dec-2025                 17-Mar-2026                   Water
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Economic        Ministry of Climate Change
Financing (IPF)                Affairs

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to generate emission reduction credits and monetize in accordance to the Paris
Agreement Article 6 in the water and waste sectors in selected areas of Pakistan.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          40.00

  Total Financing                                                                                               40.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

DETAILS
  Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Trust Funds                                                                                                  40.00
      Transformative Carbon Asset Facility Tranche A                                                            40.00




                                                                                                                  Page 1
      The World Bank
      Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in the Water and Waste Sectors (P510667)


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                    Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                     The review did authorize the preparation to continue




Other Decision (as needed)

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

1. Amid an economic crisis at the start of fiscal year (FY) 2024, Pakistan undertook decisive measures to prevent a
   sovereign default, including sharp fiscal consolidation, exchange rate adjustment, and monetary tightening. An
   IMF-SBA arrangement helped bridge financing gaps and restore confidence. Adjustment has been successful, with
   inflation now falling, the exchange rate stabilizing, and foreign exchange reserves at more comfortable levels,
   allowing for the easing of import controls. However, fiscal consolidation measures and tight monetary conditions
   continue to weigh on economic activity, with growth expected to reach only 2.7 percent in FY25. Pakistan’s must
   now sustain stabilization efforts while accelerating growth to reduce poverty from current high levels (around 25.6
   percent using the national poverty line). This will require reforms to make the tax system more effective and
   equitable, enhance the efficiency of public spending, reduce the large role of the state in the economy, lower trade
   barriers, improve the business environment, and improve basic services to address human capital deficits. Reform
   efforts are underway in these areas, but remain at the early stages of implementation. The outlook is predicated
   on the IMF Extended Fund Facility program remaining on track, continued fiscal restraint, and continued external
   financing inflows. Significant downside risks arise from heavy banking sector exposure to sovereign debt,
   geopolitical factors, and high exposure to the impacts of climate change and other natural disasters.

2. According to the 2022 Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR), Pakistan’s high vulnerability to climate
   change is a risk multiplier, compounding its human and economic development challenges. It consistently ranks
   among the top 10 countries most affected by climate change worldwide.1 More frequent extreme weather events
   adversely impact ecosystems, people, and infrastructure. Droughts, floods, and heat waves are prevalent risks,
   which could further aggravate Pakistan’s economic fragility by reducing annual GDP by 18 to 20 percent per year
   by 2050. These risks relate mainly to increasing frequency of extreme weather events, water supply variability, and
   higher water demand due to rising temperatures.2 ThinkHazard classifies extreme heat hazard as high across
   Pakistan and the long-term Climate Risk Index for 2021 ranks Pakistan eighth among countries most affected by
   climate-related events such as storms, floods, and heatwaves. Between 2010–14, five major floods resulted in
   losses of over US$18 billion with over 38 million people affected, 3.45 million houses damaged, and 10.63 million
   acres of crops destroyed. Additionally, following the 2022 floods, the government’s Post-Disaster Needs
   Assessment estimated that the need for rehabilitation and reconstruction is US$16.3 billion, with Sindh
   disproportionately affected as it received rainfall more than six times its average monthly total.3 Of the 10 districts
   of Pakistan projected to become climate hotpots by 2050, six are in Punjab.
3. The Ministry of Climate Change and Environmental Coordination (MoCC) serves as a focal point for advancing
   Pakistan’s engagement with Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. Article 6 promotes international cooperation


                                                                                                                       Page 2
       The World Bank
       Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in the Water and Waste Sectors (P510667)


     through carbon markets to address climate change and access financial support.6 Article 6.2 provides accounting
     and reporting guidance for countries to use internationally transferred mitigation outcomes (ITMOs)to count
     toward their nationally determined contributions (NDCs). Under Article 6.2 of the Paris Agreement, countries can
     trade emissions reductions bilaterally. Through payments facilitated by the proposed operation, Pakistan will be
     able to sell ITMOs to a buyer country or countries. The buyer countries purchase these units to address any gaps in
     meeting their own climate goals.

 4. Article 9 of the Paris Agreement addresses climate finance, specifically the provision of financial resources to assist
    countries with mitigation and adaptation efforts. Under Article 9, developed country Parties are obliged to provide
    financial resources to assist developing countries in both mitigation and adaptation in continuation of their existing
    obligations under the UNFCCC. According to the Article, “developed country Parties should continue to take the
    lead in mobilizing climate finance from a wide variety of sources, instruments and channels, noting the significant
    role of public funds, through a variety of actions, including supporting country-driven strategies, and taking into
    account the needs and priorities of developing country Parties. Such mobilization of climate finance should
    represent a progression beyond previous efforts.” The proposed operation will focus on climate finance related to
    mitigation efforts, i.e. emission reductions.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context
5. Pakistan is the most urbanized large country in South Asia, 4 but cities and towns are struggling to manage solid
   waste. According to a 2017 estimate, Pakistan produced around 31 million metric tons of solid waste annually.5
   Insufficient public spending on essential infrastructure, weak institutions, and low professionalization and skillsets
   within the sector constrain the adequate management of waste, leading to reduced livability, environmental
   degradation, and high incidence of marine and plastic pollution. Waste collection remains low across the country and
   the waste collected is generally disposed of in uncontrolled dumps.

6. Contamination of groundwater, coupled with poor hygiene practices and the use of inadequately treated water for
   drinking purposes, has exacerbated the incidence of diarrhea and environmental enteropathy in young children.
   The latter causes malabsorption and maldigestion of nutrients, undermining the impact of improved diets and leading
   to a host of growth and developmental issues that are manifested in child stunting. This challenge is especially acute
   in rural areas where households abstract groundwater from shallow depths for drinking purposes. In addition to the
   direct pumping of contaminated groundwater, the poor quality of well construction leads to bacteriological
   contamination of drinking water even in cases where the underlying groundwater is clean. According to the Pakistan
   National Nutrition Survey 2018, 56 percent of the water samples collected from survey households were
   contaminated with coliforms, with a higher rate in rural areas.

7. In Pakistan many urban and rural areas lack access to safe and proper sanitation facilities. The total wastewater
   produced in Pakistan amounts to about 976 million gallons per day (MGD).7 Almost 98 percent of rural households in
   Punjab have access to an improved water source, but continuous and treated piped water supply is rare and most
   households rely on groundwater pumping that is vulnerable to contamination.8 In 2018, only 13 percent of rural
   households had access to piped water, as compared to 29 percent of urban households. Even where piped water was
   available, less than 4 percent was piped into dwellings as opposed to a yard or public space. Private motorized and
   hand-pumps account for 76 percent of households with access to water. The remainder depended on protected wells
   and springs, water delivered through tankers, or bottled water.

8. Karachi generates an estimated 12,000 to 16,000 metric tons of municipal solid waste daily. 10 Around 60 percent
   of this is collected and transported to two large unsanitary dumps, Jam Chakro and Gond Pass.11 The chronic backlog

                                                                                                                        Page 3
       The World Bank
       Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in the Water and Waste Sectors (P510667)


    of uncollected waste in Karachi impacts the operating capacity of urban infrastructure. The drainage system is often
    clogged by waste, which contributes to recurrent flooding and contaminated water sources. Environmental and
    human health impacts are severe: open burning of waste generates high levels of toxic chemicals that degrade air
    quality and cause cardio-vascular diseases; inadequate solid waste management (SWM) is also linked to the
    persistent incidence of polio in Karachi;12 and runoff of surface water contributes to groundwater pollution and the
    prevalence of water-borne diseases.

9. Methane emissions in the water and sanitation and waste sectors make up a sizeable proportion of greenhouse
   gas emissions in Pakistan. As reported in Pakistan’s latest Biennial Update Report (BUR 2022) to the United Nations
   Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the waste sector emissions in Pakistan accounted for 21.72
   MtCO2e in 2018, which represents 4% of total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the country.15 This volume
   includes emissions from solid waste (10.23 MtCO2e), waste incineration and open burning (0.9 MtCO2e) and
   wastewater (11.40 MtCO2e), which makes up the largest share. Municipal wastewater and discharge are responsible
   for emitting 9.78 MtCO2e (85.8%). Projected emissions for the waste sector for the year 2030 are 89 MtCO2e,
   representing a 400% growth.

10. The proposed project adopts a "learning-by-doing" approach to build local capacity for emissions tracking and
    carbon market engagement. Through targeted technical assistance and hands-on implementation, the initiative will
    support local institutions in developing and piloting measurement, reporting, and verification (MRV) frameworks
    aligned with international standards. This will not only improve emissions accounting but also lay the groundwork for
    future participation in carbon markets, thereby unlocking new streams of climate finance for low-carbon development
    in Pakistan.




 Relationship to CPF
11. Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in the Water and Waste Sectors, hereinafter ‘Pak-FLOW’, is aligned with
    the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for FY26-35,
    addressing key objectives across multiple outcomes to foster sustainable development and climate resilience.
    Specifically, it fulfills the objectives of CPF Outcome 4: Increased Decarbonization.

12. The proposed operation also aligns with Pakistan's Climate Finance Strategy for Sustainable Development 2024,
    which outlines a comprehensive framework for mobilizing and deploying climate finance in line with national priorities
    and international commitments. Pillars 2 and 3 specifically mention climate finance infrastructure and innovative
    climate finance instruments. Significant climate finance needs are estimated at US$200 billion for Nationally
    Determined Contributions (NDC) implementation and US$348 billion for climate-resilient development by 2030. Pak-
    FLOW will leverage up to $40 million of climate and carbon finance in the next 5 years for reduced and verified
    emission reductions from the projects. Through these engagements, the project aims to significantly contribute to
    Pakistan's sustainable development goals, enhancing climate resilience and adaptation, reducing emissions, and
    improving public health and quality of life.

13. The project is consistent with and supports Pakistan's climate change strategies, including the National Climate
    Change Policy (2021), the National Adaptation Plan (2022), and the Nationally Determined Contributions (2021). It is
    also aligned with and informed by the Pakistan Policy Guidelines for Trading in Carbon Markets (2024). Similarly, it
    aligns with the key messages of the World Bank 2022 CCDR16 on strengthening the capacity of Pakistan to access

                                                                                                                      Page 4
       The World Bank
       Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in the Water and Waste Sectors (P510667)


    international climate finance through improving institutional capacity and enabling access to carbon markets. The
    project will allow the Government of Pakistan to access payments for emission reductions generated from activities
    to improve energy efficiency and reduce methane production from wastewater treatment and solid waste
    management.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 14. The Project Development Objective is to monetize greenhouse gas emissions reduced in the water and waste
     sectors in selected areas of Pakistan.


  Key Results (From PCN)

 15. Progress towards the PDO will be monitored through the following indicators:
     (i) Reduced greenhouse gas emissions (MtCO2e)
     (ii) Amount of payments made for CO2e emissions reductions generated from the projects (US$)

     Additional intermediate results indicators will be developed during project preparation and appraisal.


 D. Concept Description

16. The proposed project will support the transformation of the water and sanitation and solid waste sectors in
    Pakistan by mobilizing climate and carbon finance through payments for emission reductions generated from two
    projects: the Punjab Rural and Water Supply and Sanitation Project (PRWSSP, P169071) and the Solid Waste
    Emergency and Efficiency Project (SWEEP, P173021) in Sindh. Activities from PRWSSP include residential wastewater
    treatment, supplying clean water to villages, and integration of renewable solar energy at water pumping stations.
    Major activities from SWEEP include closure of an open dump and opening of a new sanitary landfill in Karachi. The
    proposed project consists of two key components and a Bank-executed Technical Assistance component to develop
    the capacities of the Ministry of Climate Change and the project entities in MRV and participating in the carbon market.
17. Component 1: Component 1. Payments for measured, reported and verified emission reductions (ERs) – Climate
    Finance (estimated US$18 million). This component of the proposed Project encompasses the results-based
    payments under the Emission Reductions Payment Agreement (ERPA). ERs will be generated due to improved
    wastewater treatment systems, the generation of renewable energy, energy efficiency in water supply and landfill gas
    capture and use for electricity generation. Payments will be made based on the number of ERs generated and
    contracted in the previous year, annually. The payments will reflect the volume and price outlined in the ERPA to be
    agreed with the program entities. This component directly supports Pakistan’s NDC and Climate Change Strategy with
    respect to reducing GHG emissions and engaging international cooperation and mobilizing of climate finance for its
    conditional target. The ERs and respective payments under this component would remain in Pakistan and would count
    towards its NDC.


18. Component 2. Payments for measured, reported, and verified Internationally Transferred Mitigation Outcomes
    (ITMOs) – Carbon Finance (estimated US$22 million). This component will support a pilot carbon market transaction
    under Article 6.2 of the Paris Agreement. The underlying activity, measurement, reporting and verification of ERs and

                                                                                                                        Page 5
      The World Bank
      Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in the Water and Waste Sectors (P510667)


   payments schedule will be outlined in the Mitigation Outcomes Purchase Agreement (MOPA) to be signed with the
   Project Entities. The basis for payments under the MOPA is the verified ERs reported by the Project Entity and
   payments will be made annually for such emission reductions. Under this component, the GoP will need to authorize
   and transfer a portion of the emission reductions for distribution to the carbon market buyers. This will require GoP
   to undertake the necessary tracking and reporting as required by the Paris Agreement and the transferred portion of
   emission reductions will become ITMOs and will not be able to be used by Pakistan for their NDC.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                                   Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                       No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                 No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




19. Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts: E&S risks are low at the concept stage as
    there are no construction works not procurement under the Project. Only risks associated are related to the
    downstream impacts of the parent projects, and those related to ESS2 and ESS10 - which are also low in magnitude.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Mohammad Farhanullah Sami
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Economic Affairs
  Kazim Niaz
  Secretary
  Secretary@ead.gov.pk

 Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                                    Page 6
     The World Bank
     Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in the Water and Waste Sectors (P510667)


 Ministry of Climate Change
 Aisha Humera
 Secretary
 js.cf@mocc.gov.pk

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Mohammad Farhanullah Sami

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Josses Mugabi                          06-Jun-2025

Country Director:                      Gailius J. Draugelis                   15-Jul-2025




                                                                                            Page 7
