Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA) (P510359)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01437




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA) (P510359)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                        Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                                                                                      Philippines Accelerated
                                                                                                                      Water and Sanitation
                          Philippines                    EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC         P510359
                                                                                                                      Project in Selected Areas
                                                                                                                      (AWSPSA)
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         05-Nov-2025                   30-Mar-2026                    Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Department of Public
                                                         Works and Highways




_For Official Use Only_
                          Republic of the Philippines    (DPWH), Department of
                                                         the Interior and Local
                                                         Government (DILG)

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          To increase access to safely managed water supply and sanitation services and improve the performance of water
                          service providers in selected areas of the Philippines.

                          Components
                          Infrastructure Investments for Safe and Climate Resilient Water Supply Services
                          Infrastructure Investments for Safe, Climate Resilient Sanitation and WASH Services in Institutions
                          Institutional Reforms and Capacity Building
                          Project Management and Technical Assistance
                          Contingent Emergency Response Component

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

                          SUMMARY



                                                                                                                                              Page 1



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                      The World Bank
                                      Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA) (P510359)



                                Total Operation Cost                                                                                                                      268.85

                                Total Financing                                                                                                                           268.85
                                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                                            250.89
                                Financing Gap                                                                                                                                0.00

                              DETAILS
                              Private Sector Investors/Shareholders

                              Equity                                                  Amount             Debt                                                        Amount

                                 Government Contribution                                     264.42          Commercial Debt                                                    3.11

                                      Government Resources                                    13.53             Unguaranteed                                                    3.11

                                      IBRD                                                   250.89

                                 Non-Government Contribution                                    1.33




_For Official Use Only_
                                      Private sector Equity                                     1.33

                              Total                                                          265.75                                                                             3.11




                              @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial


                              Decision
                              The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                              B. Introduction and Context
                              Regional Context
                              1.      Water security underpins development in East Asia and the Pacific (EAP), home to over 2.1 billion people and one
                              of the world’s fastest-growing regions. Water drives economic growth, sustains agriculture, tourism, and industry, and
                              supports 700 million water-dependent jobs. Neglecting water security, particularly under climate pressure, poses a
                              significant threat to livelihoods, food security, and ecosystems.1 The region’s global role in food supply and hydrological


                          1
                           Water security is defined as “the availability of an acceptable quantity and quality of water for health, livelihoods, ecosystems, and production, coupled
                          with an acceptable level of water-related risks to people, environments, and economies” (Grey and Sadoff 2007; World Bank Water Strategy, Building a

                                                                                                                                                                                Page 2



                                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA) (P510359)


                           cycles amplifies its importance. Climate change intensifies water challenges, while urbanization and rural disparities
                           compound risks. By 2050, water scarcity could reduce Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by up to 15 percent in lower-income
                           countries, leading to severe socio-economic consequences2. EAP faces severe climate-related disasters, with annual losses
                           exceeding US$300 billion. Countries like the Philippines rank among the most vulnerable to extreme weather events. With
                           62 percent urbanization, cities such as Jakarta, now the biggest city in the world3 , as well as Manila, Bangkok, and
                           Ulaanbaatar face surging water demand and flood vulnerability, while rural populations in Cambodia, the Lao People’s
                           Democratic Republic (PDR), and Papua New Guinea (PNG) remain exposed to floods and droughts. Water constraints pose
                           a threat to economic corridors and growth strategies.

                           2.     Despite progress in water and sanitation, gaps in access and quality of service persist. While 78 percent of the
                           population in the region has access to safely managed water and 64 percent to safely managed sanitation, many countries,
                           including the Philippines and those in the Pacific, are stagnating or off track in meeting the Sustainable Development Goals
                           (SDGs). Over 80 million people in the region lack even the lower service level of basic drinking water and 154 million need
                           improved sanitation (Joint Implementation Plan (JMP), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)/World Health
                           Organization (WHO)0. Pollution affects 80 percent of river water, and groundwater overdrafts strain resources. Expanding
                           access requires strategic investments and improved storage capacity.




_For Official Use Only_
                           3.     The EAP region’s urban and rural populations face distinct water-related risks, increasing water demand driven
                           by urban development, population growth, and climate change. Droughts and ﬂoods are already imposing high costs,
                           and water risks and associated costs are increasing throughout the region. The region is largely urbanized at 62 percent,
                           with some of the world's largest megalopolises like Jakarta, Bangkok, and Metro Manila, and rapidly growing metropolitan
                           regions like Ulaanbaatar. These large urban areas have high water demand that is increasing exponentially and are highly
                           vulnerable to floods. A substantial share of EAP’s population remains rural, including Indonesia (41 percent), Thailand (46
                           percent), the Philippines (52 percent), Vietnam (61 percent), Laos People’s Democratic Republic (Laos PDR, 62 percent),
                           Cambodia (74 percent), and Papua New Guinea (PNG, 66 percent). These countries have predominantly rural populations
                           that are at risk of both floods and droughts. For instance, the Eastern Economic Corridor, part of the Thailand 4.0 scheme,
                           only meets 50 percent of the total water demand during normal rainfall years, while the country is highly exposed to floods
                           along the Chao Phraya River basin.


                           4.      The Philippines exemplifies the water-related challenges faced across the EAP region: too much water, too little
                           water, and water that is too polluted. Climate risk, ranging from rising temperatures and intense rainfall to typhoons
                           and sea-level rise, could cost the Philippines up to 13.6 percent of GDP by 2040. Rapid urbanization and industrialization
                           heighten water demand, while inadequate water supply and sanitation (WSS) services perpetuate poverty and health
                           risks. Water pollution is driven by plastic waste, domestic and industrial wastewater, and agricultural runoff, and
                           exacerbated by poor waste management and insufficient sanitation infrastructure. Investments in WSS infrastructure
                           are crucial for resilience and economic growth.
                            Sectoral and Institutional Context



                          Water Secure Future, 2025). Sanitation is a crucial aspect of ensuring water security, as it protects the quality of water supplied and water resources. See
                          Water for Shared Prosperity (World Bank, 2024).
                          2
                            Global Commission for the Economics of Water (GCEW, 2024)
                          3
                            UN, World Urbanization Prospects, 2025.

                                                                                                                                                                                 Page 3



                                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA) (P510359)


                          Fragmentation and Governance Issues
                          5.    Institutional fragmentation undermines water governance across EAP. Many countries lack dedicated water
                          ministries, resulting in responsibilities being dispersed among multiple agencies and complicating policymaking,
                          regulation, and budgeting. In the Philippines, overlapping mandates among water-related agencies and decentralization
                          of responsibilities and authorities lead to policy conflicts and inefficiencies, resulting in uncoordinated investments that
                          threaten water security and environmental sustainability. Integrated approaches and regional collaboration offer
                          pathways to mitigate water and climate risks. However, fragmented governance and regulatory frameworks hinder
                          reforms and investments, leaving the region vulnerable to water crises with serious social and economic consequences.
                          Policy, institutional, and regulatory reforms are urgently needed to address fragmentation, enhance accountability, and
                          more effectively manage trade-offs across sectors, thereby facilitating adaptive management of water resources for
                          people, food, and the planet.

                          Service and Quality Gaps
                          6.     Operational inefficiencies and weak regulatory frameworks are resulting in poor utility performance. Closing the
                          WSS access gap in EAP will require significant investment, with an estimated annual spending gap of US$2.9 billion. Public
                          financing will be essential for vulnerable populations, while sector reforms can help crowd in private financing. Service
                          quality and performance improvements are critical. Non-Revenue Water (NRW) rates hover around 30 percent regionally,




_For Official Use Only_
                          with Thailand and Indonesia reporting rates of 30 percent and 34 percent, respectively. Pacific Island countries face even
                          greater inefficiencies: PNG averages 42 percent, while Kiribati experiences up to 90 percent in some areas. High NRW
                          levels represent wasted resources and lost opportunities for service improvements. A cyclical pattern of ‘build, neglect,
                          rebuild’ undermines WSS infrastructure. Insufficient operation and maintenance (O&M) lead to deteriorating services
                          and inadequate tariff revenues. Weak monitoring and data management compound these challenges, limiting
                          understanding of system conditions and hindering timely interventions.

                          Climate Vulnerability
                          7.    Climate change, population growth, and urbanization intensify water challenges and their costs. EAP faces
                          severe climate-related disasters, with annual losses exceeding US$300 billion. Flood protection and water storage
                          investments are critical. For example, Bangkok’s flood protection costs are estimated at US$1 billion for a 30-year return
                          and US$1.4 billion for a 100-year return. In the Philippines, the per capita storage capacity was only 68 m³ in 2017; Central
                          Luzon alone is expected to require 4.86 million cubic meters of additional storage by 2050, at a cost of approximately
                          US$1.8 billion. Improving water productivity, the economic value generated per cubic meter, is key to managing water
                          sustainably. EAP’s average water productivity is US$22.1/m³, which is less than half that of Europe and Central Asia
                          (US$48.1) and North America (US$47.0). Rates vary widely: Australia and Japan achieve US$133.1 and US$57.2, while
                          Thailand (US$7.7), Indonesia (US$4.8), and the Philippines (US$4) lag significantly. Enhancing water productivity through
                          effective reduction of water demand and closing infrastructure gaps can help mitigate scarcity and reduce economic
                          losses.

                          Investment and Institutional Financing Gap
                          8.    Financing gaps pose a significant barrier to water security: Inadequate funding, combined with fragmented
                          mandates, undermines the resilience of related sectors, including jobs, health, education, and food security. While
                          some providers can attract private capital, others need to enhance their creditworthiness to draw investments. Private
                          sector participation can provide essential capital, management expertise, and innovation to reduce costs and boost
                          climate resilience, provided there is an enabling environment with appropriate incentives. Smaller-scale service providers

                                                                                                                                                   Page 4



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA) (P510359)


                          often face financial constraints; consolidating operations can optimize efficiencies. Support from governments,
                          international financial institutions, and the private sector is crucial for securing technical assistance and funding. Regional
                          cooperation, particularly among archipelagic and island nations or ASEAN countries, can facilitate knowledge sharing and
                          the development of coordinated strategies to address shared water scarcity and sanitation issues.

                          9.     The proposed US$268.85 million Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (the AWSPSA) will
                          be the first phase of a regional multiphase programmatic approach (MPA) which will support improved water security
                          and enhanced resilience to water-related climate risks. It supports a structured approach to improve and expand climate
                          resilient WSS services and strengthen management of WSS systems to boost efficiency, operations, and creditworthiness.
                          This approach could provide a clear strategy and action plan to address WSS gaps, water security, and climate resilience
                          in the Philippines.

                          C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                          The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to safely managed water supply and sanitation
                          services and improve the performance of water service providers in selected areas of the Philippines.




_For Official Use Only_
                          Key Results
                           10. Achievement of the PDO will be measured through the following key results indicators:
                                      (a) People provided with safely managed water (Number, female, youth);
                                      (b) People provided with safely managed sanitation (Number, female, youth);
                                      (c) Water Service Providers that attain non-revenue water levels of 20 percent or below (Number); and
                                      (d) Water Service Providers that have achieved at least 90 percent recovery of O&M costs through tariffs
                                          (Number).


                           D. Project Description
                           11. The proposed AWSPSA will constitute a US$268.85 million Investment Project Financing (IPF) operation ﬁnanced
                           by a US$250.89 million IBRD loan, US$13.53 million counterpart funds, and US$4.4 million private capital. The AWSPSA
                           will also support the implementation of sector policy reforms included in the 2025-2026 Energy Transition and Climate
                           Resilience Development Policy Loan (ETCR DPL). The project design envisages a five-year implementation period and
                           will comprise ﬁve components as follows:
                           12. Component 1. Infrastructure Investments for Safe and Climate Resilient Water Supply Services (US$213.30
                           million: US$197.55 million IBRD, US$11.32 counterpart, and US$4.43 million private capital). This component aims to
                           expand access to safely managed water through climate-resilient infrastructure, including building or upgrading water
                           systems from source to household and watershed protection measures. It will comprise the following three
                           subcomponents:
                           13. Subcomponent 1a. Water Supply Infrastructure Investments in the Loboc Cluster, Bohol Province. This
                           subcomponent will develop water supply infrastructure in one city and seven municipalities (the Loboc Cluster) in Bohol,
                           including (a) a 60,000 cubic meters per day bulk water supply system sourced from the Loboc River, comprising intake,


                                                                                                                                                    Page 5



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA) (P510359)


                          treatment, storage, transmission, and related facilities; (b) the rehabilitation, upgrading, and expansion of water
                          distribution systems, including distribution pipelines, service connections, district metering areas, and associated
                          equipment; and (c) implementation of watershed protection measures. Private capital mobilization (PCM) is expected
                          from private distribution companies that will lay pipelines to offtake bulk water for distribution in their service areas.
                          Provinces and LGUs with private water operators may also enter O&M contracts for the water supply systems. These
                          contracts will include establishing asset maintenance funds, which need to be set up by the private operators to sustain
                          the operations of the systems; this arrangement is veriﬁed as private capital enabling (PCE).
                          14. Subcomponent 1b. Water Supply Infrastructure Investments in Siargao Island in Surigao del Norte Province. This
                          subcomponent funds construction, rehabilitation, and upgrading of water supply infrastructure in selected
                          municipalities in Siargao Island, including water sources and treatment facilities, transmission and distribution systems,
                          storage facilities, service connections, and a centralized water quality testing laboratory in Surigao City.
                          15. Subcomponent 1c. Water Supply Infrastructure Investments in Jolo and adjacent Barangays in Indanan and
                          Patikul in Sulu Province. This subcomponent will include the construction, rehabilitation, and upgrading of water supply
                          systems in Jolo and neighboring barangays in Indanan and Patikul, including source development and protection,
                          treatment facilities, distribution networks, storage facilities, pumping facilities, service connections, and climate resilient
                          ancillary facilities.




_For Official Use Only_
                          16. Component 2. Infrastructure Investments for Safe and Climate Resilient Sanitation and WASH Services in
                          Institutions. (US$12.90 million: US$12.32 million IBRD and US$0.58 million counterpart). This component will expand
                          access to safe, inclusive, and climate-resilient sanitation and WASH services in institutions such as public schools, health
                          centers, and other public places. It will comprise the following three subcomponents:
                          17. Subcomponent 2a. Sanitation and WASH in Bohol. This subcomponent will ﬁnance the construction and
                          rehabilitation of WASH facilities in public schools, daycare centers, health centers, and other public institutions in Bohol
                          Province.
                          18. Subcomponent 2b. Sanitation and WASH in Siargao, Surigao del Norte. This subcomponent will include
                          construction of fecal sludge management facilities, procurement of equipment for septage collection, transport, and
                          by-product re-use, and construction and rehabilitation of WASH facilities in public schools, public institutions and spaces
                          in Siargao Island.
                          19. Subcomponent 2c. Sanitation and WASH in Jolo, Sulu. This subcomponent will ﬁnance the construction and
                          rehabilitation of WASH facilities in public schools, daycare centers, and social welfare centers in Jolo.
                          20. Component 3. Institutional Reforms and Capacity Building (US$13.44 million IBRD). This Component aims to
                          enhance the eﬃciency and sustainability of WSS services and support the effective operation of the infrastructure
                          financed under the Project by supporting fundamental institutional reforms and capacity-building of provinces, LGUs,
                          and water service providers. The support also includes project management costs of the DILG.
                          21. Component 4. Project Management and Technical Assistance (US$27.58 million IBRD, US$ 1 million counterpart).
                          This Component will comprise the following two subcomponents:
                          22. Subcomponent 4a Project Management. This subcomponent will ﬁnance the project management costs of the
                          Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH). Eligible activities will include consulting and non-consulting services,
                          training, and relevant operating expenses required to implement the project in accordance with World Bank policy and
                          guidelines.

                                                                                                                                                    Page 6



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA) (P510359)


                           23. Subcomponent 4b. Technical Assistance (TA). This subcomponent will ﬁnance TA for project implementation and
                           capacity building, including preparation of studies, sanitation and watershed management planning, development of
                           future water supply and sanitation investments and citizen engagement activities.
                           24. Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (US$0 million). This zero-cost component will allow
                           the Government to quickly access project funds in response to an eligible disaster, emergency, or crisis.
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                             Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                           25. The World Bank's Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) will apply to this project, ensuring that environmental
                           and social (E&S) risks are effectively managed throughout its lifecycle. The project aims to deliver significant benefits to
                           beneficiary communities, including improved health and sanitation outcomes and enhanced economic productivity.




_For Official Use Only_
                           However, the nature of the project and the scope of civil works present substantial E&S risks and impacts. These include
                           (a) loss of vegetation due to tree cutting; (b) source contamination due to construction activities affecting health and
                           safety of downstream riparians; (c) forest land diversion for laying transmission mains, construction of storage
                           reservoirs; (d) OHS risks on communities during construction of distribution network; (e) air/water/soil pollution due to
                           the civil works including debris disposal; (f) impacts due to siting of septage treatment facilities and operation stage
                           impacts such as odor and quality of effluents; and (g) contamination of ground and/or surface water due to improperly
                           designed facilities, etc. Considering the presence of Protected Areas in the project provinces, impacts on local
                           biodiversity are also expected. Clearances from the Protected Areas Management Board will also be required before
                           the commencement of works for the sub-projects. These impacts based on the initial assessments are not expected to
                           be significant, but need detailed assessment to confirm their nature and significance. This assessment shall be carried
                           out once the exact location and design of the interventions are finalized during the implementation phase. Accordingly,
                           the Environmantal and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and initial assessments carried out by the implementing
                           agencies outline the measures and factors to be considered during the detailed phase of the project; a broad ESMP and
                           highlights the need for obtaining relevant regulatory clearances from local authorities before the commencement of
                           works. During the implementation of similar civil works in the past in these provinces, mitigation measures for most of
                           these impacts were integrated into the construction contracts. In addition, DPWH has demonstrated the capacity to
                           manage and address such impacts. Considering these factors, the environmental risk of the project is rated as
                           “Substantial” at appraisal.
                           26. Similarly, social risks include, labor risks encompassing occupational health and safety concerns, and issues related
                           to gender-based violence, sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment. Additionally, there are risksdisplacement and
                           temporary road right of way/access issues of households and businesses, as well as community health and safety
                           concerns, i.e traffic and roads condition. Site visits and baseline information indicate that the project will not operate in
                           ancestral domains, and no adverse impacts on Indigenous Peoples have been identified. However, specific to Bohol,
                           risks to cultural heritage sites have been identified, i.e. heritage churches and convents. Contextual risks include
                           institutional capacity issues at the LGU level and security concerns for workers in project activities located in conflict-

                                                                                                                                                   Page 7



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA) (P510359)


                          affected areas, i.e. Jolo, Sulu. To mitigate the identified environmental and social risks, the DPWH and DILG have
                          developed an ESMF. This framework serves as a comprehensive guide for both national and local implementing agencies
                          in assessing and managing the environmental and social impacts of the AWSPSA subprojects during their
                          implementation. The ESMF ensures that the project aligns with the environmental and social Framework of the World
                          Bank, as well as national and local government regulations. The Labor Management Plan (LMP) and the Resettlement
                          Policy Framework (RPF), which address labor conditions and resettlement issues, respectively, are integrated in the
                          ESMF. Additionally, detailed Chance Find Procedures have been included in the ESMF to address accidental discovery of
                          artifacts during construction. These documents collectively establish a robust framework for ensuring that the project
                          is implemented in a socially and environmentally responsible manner. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan, which includes
                          the project's Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), has been developed to ensure effective communication and address
                          concerns throughout the project's implementation.

                          E. Implementation
                          Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                          27. The AWSPSA will be implemented by the DPWH and the DILG in partnership with the beneficiary provinces and
                          LGUs. The DPWH will serve as the lead implementation agency and will undertake the procurement and implementation
                          of Components 1, 2, and 4. Upon completion of the facilities, including any process-proving, operations, and




_For Official Use Only_
                          performance conditions, DPWH will turn over the ownership and management of the facilities to the provinces and the
                          LGUs who will be responsible for their O&M. The DPWH will enter into an agreement with the provinces and the LGUs
                          to delineate project responsibilities. The DILG, on the other hand, will be responsible for Component 3 on institutional
                          reforms and capacity building. DILG will work directly with provinces, LGUs, and WSPs. This is to ensure that a distinct,
                          ring-fenced, and capable entity will sustain the operations and maintenance of the facilities built under the project.
                          28. The DPWH has good experience in implementing World Bank projects, while the DILG has a unit focused on WSS
                          projects. The DPWH has a Unified Project Management Office (UPMO), which is responsible for the implementation of
                          all overseas development assistance projects and is well-versed in processes of the World Bank and the oversight
                          agencies, Department of Finance (DOF) and Department of Economy, Planning and Development (DEPDev). For the
                          DILG, a WSS team within the Office of Project Development Services (OPDS) will be in- charge of implementation. The
                          DPWH and DILG teams will be supported by specialized consultants who will assist in project management functions
                          such as procurement, contract management, project supervision, and financial management.
                          29. The Steering Committee, co-chaired by DPWH and DILG, will provide policy direction and guidance in project
                          implementation. It will have members from concerned operating units of the DPWH and DILG, as well as representatives
                          from the DOF, DEPDev, Department of Environment and Natural Resources (through the Environmental Management
                          Bureau and Water Resources Management Office), Department of Education, Department of Health, Local Water Utilities
                          Administration, Mindanao Development Authority, and the provinces of Bohol, Surigao del Norte, and Sulu.

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                          CONTACT POINT

                          World Bank




                                                                                                                                               Page 8



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Philippines Accelerated Water and Sanitation Project in Selected Areas (AWSPSA) (P510359)


                           Ma Fiorella Delos Reyes Fabella
                           Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                           Aude-Sophie Rodella
                           Lead Water Economist

                           Midori Makino
                           Lead Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Republic of the Philippines

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)

                           Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG)




_For Official Use Only_
                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                     Ma Fiorella Delos Reyes Fabella, Aude-Sophie Rodella, Midori Makino

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:                Maria Angelica Sotomayor               06-Jun-2025

                          Country Director:                        Zafer Mustafaoglu                      07-Feb-2026




                                                                                                                                          Page 9



                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
