Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Second Community Action For Landscape Management Program For Results (P510697)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                      Date Prepared/Updated: 07/07/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05021




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Aug 06, 2025                                                                             Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Community Action For Landscape Management Program For Results (P510697)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510697                   Program-for-Results Financing (PforR)   CALM II                    2027

                     Operation Name            Second Community Action for Landscape Management Program for Results

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Ethiopia                  Ethiopia                                EASTERN AND                Environment, Natural
                                                                                       SOUTHERN AFRICA            Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                  Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                     the Federal               Ministry of Agriculture                 10-Nov-2025                07-Jul-2026
                     Democratic Republic
                     of Ethiopia




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     10-Jun-2025               1,706,500,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to improve livelihoods by expanding area under sustainable land
                     management practices and securing land tenure in degraded highland areas.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     This hybrid operation (CALM II, P510697), comprising PforR and IPF components, will support the Government of
                     Ethiopia's productive landscape restoration efforts. The PforR part of the operation will finance sustainable land and
                     natural resources management interventions at watershed level, enhance land administration, and improve security of
                     tenure for both private and communal land resources. The operation will build on the current Climate Action through
                     Landscape Management Program (CALM, P170384) to finance ESIF-2 priorities in Ethiopia’s highlands. The operation

                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                   Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Community Action For Landscape Management Program For Results (P510697)



                     aims to (i) expand the area under sustainable land management practices in degraded highland areas – specifically
                     targeting areas that sustain and restore important ecosystem services; (ii) continue the momentum for certifying,
                     registering and digitalizing rural land tenure rights and subsequent transactions in Ethiopia's highlands and expand this
                     process to include certification and registration of selected forests and grazing lands under communal land tenure; and
                     (iii) provide new and additional focus on improving farm incomes and job creation. The Program will deliver benefits
                     and support for vulnerable groups. This will build on successful previous experience to ensure that female-headed
                     households, landless youth, the asset-poor and demobilized veterans are targeted for support. This operation is
                     expected to deliver substantive climate, biodiversity, and ecosystem co-benefits. The Program Development Objective
                     (PDO) is to improve livelihoods by expanding area under sustainable land management practices and securing land
                     tenure in degraded highland areas. The Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) under Result Area 1- Participatory
                     Watershed and Forest Restoration and Management and Result Area 2- Rural land administration of the PforR
                     component are strategically designed to provide strong incentives for scaling-up landscape restoration and land
                     administration interventions. The IPF component, financed by IDA and SCALE, will provide cross-cutting support to
                     generate outcomes in both result areas and the broader government program through the provision of technical advice
                     and capacity-building. The IPF component will be targeted to address themes where performance improvements were
                     needed during implementation of the CALM program (P170384). IDA will finance: (i) capacity building for agribusiness
                     development; (ii) linking smallholders to agricultural value chains; (iii) capacity building on fiduciary, environmental and
                     social aspects; (iv) land productivity assessment, comprising evaluations of land quality (e.g. inherent fertility, pH, etc.),
                     crop yield (specific crop per specific area), cultivation frequency, farm technology (e.g. improved farming techniques;
                     Irrigation; crop varieties); and (v) strengthening monitoring, reporting and verification, including used of advanced
                     remote sensing. SCALE will finance technical assistance for (i) the design and registration of an emission reduction




Public Disclosure
                     program covering non-forest related emission categories (soil carbon), (ii) setting up a national approach to generate
                     carbon assets from landscape management (forests and non-forests, excluding protected areas), (iii) establishing a
                     carbon registry at the Ministry of Planning and Development (MOPD) and undertaking other carbon readiness activities,
                     and (iv) a gender and social inclusion assessment of the emission reduction program to identify gaps, develop action
                     plans for marginalized groups' inclusion, integrate gender considerations into program implementation, promote
                     equitable participation and benefit-sharing, and ensure regular consultations with women and disadvantaged
                     communities to address their needs and interests.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Program will be implemented in Dire Dawa City Administration; and Oromia, Amhara, Tigray, Sidama, Southwest,
                     Central Ethiopia, South Ethiopia, Harari, Benishangul, and Gambelia regions of Ethiopia. The IPF component activities
                     will be carried out to provide cross-cutting support for achieving outcomes in both Result Areas of the PforR. This will be
                     accomplished through technical assistance and capacity-building. Ethiopia, with a population of around 132 million
                     (2024, est.), is Africa's second most populous nation after Nigeria. Despite rapid economic growth estimated at 6.4% in
                     FY2021/22, it remains one of the poorest nations, with a per capita gross national income of $1,020. Ethiopia aims to
                     reach lower-middle-income status by 2025. Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth slowed from FY2019/20 to
                     FY2021/22 due to COVID-19 and other shocks. However, agriculture, which employs over 70% of the population, saw
                     improved growth during this period.

                     Land degradation in Ethiopia significantly impacts rural growth and poverty reduction, with approximately 80 % of land
                     prone to soil degradation. Today, approximately 27 million hectares (ha) are significantly eroded, affecting almost 50

                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                          Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Community Action For Landscape Management Program For Results (P510697)



                     percent of highlands and one in five people. Of the total area degraded, 14 million ha are seriously eroded, with over 2
                     million ha beyond reclamation that makes economic sense. Barriers to adopting conservation practices include land
                     tenure insecurity and limited technical support including poor community participation. Previous successful
                     program/projects targeting vulnerable groups will be built upon to improve tenure security and support for female-
                     headed households, landless youth, and others, delivering climate, biodiversity, and ecosystem co-benefits. The FCV
                     context of the country, specifically armed conflicts in Amhara region and partly southwestern part of the Oromia region,
                     may affect the implementation of the Program.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Ethiopia’s Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) will be the principal implementing agency for the CALM-II, which includes the
                     PforR & IPF components. The MOA has extensive experience with WB financed projects, under the ESF and old
                     safeguards policies, like Sustainable Landscape management I & II (closed), and Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods
                     Project I (RLLP-I) (P163383, IPF, closed), & RLLP-II (P174385, IPF, active), with satisfactory ES performance.

                     MoA, through IPF Projects, including RLLP-I and RLLP-II, has established functional ES Risk Management (ESRM)
                     systems. These include grievance redress mechanism (GRM), ES screening, and preparation & implementation of site-
                     specific ES instruments for the RLLP-I & RLLP-II subprojects. Additionally, monitoring & reporting of the IPF project
                     (RLLP-II) implementation are conducted. Regarding RLLP-II staffing, the MoA has deployed 14 ES specialists at the
                     national & regional PMU levels, & assigned 47 focal ES persons at woreda level. The RLLP-II ES performance is rated
                     satisfactory in the recent mission aide memoire.




Public Disclosure
                     Accordingly, the proposed IPF component of the CALM-II will be implemented through the existing government
                     institutional structures from the federal to the local levels. Strengthening coordination among the national, regional,
                     zonal and woreda level agriculture and natural resources, land administration and use offices, as CALM-II implementers,
                     is important for managing the ES aspects of the IPF component. Additional ES specialists requirement will be assessed
                     during preparation. Environmental institutions, including the federal EPA, will serve as regulators. The Channel One
                     Program Coordination Directorate of the MoF will oversee the hybrid operation while the Ethiopian Institution of the
                     Ombudsman provides capacity building for regional and woreda GRM offices. The proposed IPF component will support
                     targeted ESRM capacity-building at all administrative levels where the CALM-II will be implemented.




                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Moderate
                     The IPF component of the hybrid operation will include TA activities, including capacity building on fiduciary,
                     environmental & social aspects; land productivity assessment; strengthening monitoring, reporting & verification
                     (MRV), including use of advanced remote sensing; and carbon market readiness support (preparation of Emissions
                     Reductions Programs (ERP) focusing on soil carbon (CALM-1 activities), forests (except protected areas), and non-


                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                    Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Community Action For Landscape Management Program For Results (P510697)



                     forests, along with SESA for ERP). See section C above for details. These TA & capacity building may have
                     environmental, health & safety (EHS) risks associated with occupational and community health and safety (OCHS)
                     risks related to workers and communities (see ESS2, ESS4); pollution related to fuel consumption & vehicle emissions;
                     e-waste and associated pollution from the use of remote sensing technologies (see ESS3); & limited coordination
                     among environmental agencies. Some of the TA activities (e.g., ERP based on forests) may have downstream EHS
                     impacts, including deforestation & habitat loss (leakage/displacement outside project areas), OHS hazards, and
                     community tensions over resource allocation & benefits. To address these EHS risks, the ToRs for TA & related
                     capacity building activities will integrate the objectives of relevant ESSs to ensure that activities & outputs are
                     consistent with the WB ESF. The capacity-building assessment for ESRM will be conducted as part of the
                     environmental and social systems assessment (ESSA) prior to appraisal. For the IPF activities, a standalone
                     Stakeholders Engagement Plan & an Environmental & Social Commitment Plan addressing labor, SEA, & security
                     management aspects will be prepared by the MoA, approved by the Bank, & disclosed. SESA for ERP will be prepared
                     during implementation. Overall, the environmental risk of the IPF component is rated as Moderate at this stage & will
                     be assessed in detail during preparation.
                                                                                                                                      Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Social Risk of the IPF Component is rated as Moderate at this stage. It focuses on TA activities, including capacity
                     building, consultancy services, and downstream activities. The key social risks and impacts includes (i) risk of workers
                     condition if the client employed consultants for the land productivity assessment (ESS2), (ii) risk of sexual exploitation
                     and abuse (SEA/SH) resulted from the consultants engagement (ESS4); (iii) risk related to lack of proper consultation
                     during the preparation of the E&S instruments such as SESA and land productivity assessment of the vulnerable




Public Disclosure
                     groups including women and disadvantaged groups which potentially lead to lack of trust and support (ESS7 & ESS10);
                     (iv) risk of inequalities in benefit-sharing among stakeholder (including the historically underserved and vulnerable
                     groups) due to their gender other venerability factors (ESS7); (v) risks of conflict on the land use associated with
                     change on the land use and landscape management (downstream impact of the land productivity assessment); and
                     (vi) risks of exclusion smallholders from participating in carbon asset generation (ESS10) . These risks will be assessed
                     in detail during the preparation phase.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The IPF component will have a wide range of positive ES results. However, there may be some potential ES risks
                      associated with the proposed IPF component .These are mainly related to OCHS aspects (see ESS2, ESS4); pollution
                      related to fuel consumption & vehicle emissions; e-waste and associated pollution from the use of remote sensing
                      technologies (see ESS3); ESHS risks linked with the downstream implementation of TA support (e.g. ERP docs),
                      including leakage/displacement; create or exacerbate the existing social discrimination/exclusion of vulnerability of
                      the disadvantaged & vulnerable groups; SEA/SH vulnerability may increase; & limited ES technical capacity of
                      regulatory agencies/EPAs. To address the above risks, the MoA will prepare, consult on & disclose relevant ES
                      instruments (see Section C.1.) for the TA component prior to appraisal. Also, ToRs for TA activities, consistent with
                      the WB ESF requirements, will be prepared during implementation.


                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Community Action For Landscape Management Program For Results (P510697)



                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      MoA is developing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) for the IPF component prior to the appraisal and summary of
                      stakeholders engagement during the preparation will be included in the SEP . The plan aims to engage relevant
                      stakeholders such as community groups, including historically underserved and other vulnerable groups throughout
                      the program’s implementation period. Thus , the SEP will be prepared by taking into consideration of the
                      underserved group and outlines the characteristics and interests of the relevant stakeholders and methods of
                      engagement throughout the Program’s life, including the preparation phase. The SEP will outline how the
                      implementing agency will engage with stakeholders meaningfully, timely, relevant, understandable and accessible
                      information, and consulting with them in a culturally appropriate manner. Also, the SEP will include a Grievance
                      Redress Mechanism (GRM). The SEP by appraisal will include a record of the stakeholder engagement activities.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The proposed TA activities will engage direct workers and contracted workers, mainly technical consultants, for
                      capacity development activities (e.g., fiduciary & ES capacity assessment, training) and consultancy services (e.g.,
                      MRV, land productivity assessment). No community and primary supply workers are anticipated. These TA activities
                      may pose risks related to labor and working conditions, including OHS issues, worker security, and GBV risks during
                      capacity building and consultancy services. The ESCP will include labor management actions, including the
                      development of a simple OHS protocol per ESS2, WBG EHS Guidelines, and national labor laws. The TA activities will
                      comply with the ESF requirements to address potential downstream OHS risks.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      The IPF component will positively impact ESS3 as the TA will provide cross-cutting support to generate outcomes in
                      both result areas of the PforR component by improving resource efficiency, reducing GHG emissions, and enhancing
                      carbon sequestrations through enhancing the capacity of the implementing entities. However, travel for TA activities
                      could lead to fuel consumption & vehicle emissions, contributing to air pollution. The downstream implementation of
                      some of the TA activities (e.g., ERP focusing on forests, except protected areas) may have direct/indirect risks to ESS3,
                      including leakage/displacement outside project areas. The environmental risks of using remote sensing technologies
                      are generally considered to be low related to ESS3. Thus, ToRs for TA and capacity building activities, must integrate
                      ESS3 and other relevant ESSs objectives to ensure that activities & outputs are consistent with the WB ESF.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      The TA activities present potential community health and safety (CHS) risks, including road and traffic safety and
                      SEA/SH risks. However, the risk of labor influx is not expected. The downstream implementation of the TA activities
                      (e.g., ERP) could impact ESS4 by causing community tensions over resource allocation, which may increase
                      deforestation nearby and affect ecosystem services for local communities. This risk needs to be assessed. Thus, the
                      ToRs for TA activities must incorporate ESS4 and other relevant ESS objectives to ensure that activities and outputs
                      align with the requirements of the WB ESF. The implementation of the TA activities may be impacted in areas where
                      active armed conflicts are going on. The ESCP will incorporate measures to address CHS risks, the necessity for
                      security risk assessment related to TA activities, and the requirement for the Borrower to adopt codes of conduct
                      with SEA/SH provisions.



                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Community Action For Landscape Management Program For Results (P510697)



                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                    Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS5 is not considered relevant at this stage. The IPF activities specifically focused on the Technical support and do
                      not require land acquisition or other risks or impacts associated with ESS5. However, the TA activities may result in
                      downstream resettlement or displacement impacts and risks outside the project areas. These impact and risks should
                      be properly mitigated by including measures in the TORs for the TA of SESA for preparation of Emissions Reductions
                      Program (ERP).

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                  Relevant
                      Resources

                      The IPF component may have direct/indirect positive impacts on ESS6 through enhancing the capacity of the
                      implementing entities, thereby contributing to the objectives of the ESS6, including forest restoration and
                      conservation. The downstream implementation of some of the TA activities (such as ERP focusing on forests, along
                      with SESA, excluding protected areas) may have direct/indirect impacts on ESS6, including leakage or displacement
                      due to deforestation and habitat loss outside project areas, where efforts to prevent deforestation in one area could
                      lead to increased deforestation in surrounding areas. This risk needs to be assessed. Thus, the ToRs for TA and related
                      capacity building activities, must integrate ESS6 and other relevant ESSs objectives to ensure that activities & outputs
                      are consistent with the WB ESF.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                             Relevant
                      Local Communities




Public Disclosure
                      The proposed activities will be implemented in Gambella and Benishangul, and areas where there are pastoralists and
                      agro-pastoralists in Oromia and former SNNP regional states who meet the criteria of ESS7. Hence, the Stakeholder
                      Engagement plan (SEP) will consider the inclusion of the historically underserved as well as other vulnerable groups
                      during engagement. Thus, meaningful consultation will be conducted during the preparation and the strategy for
                      meaningful consultation will be included in the SEP to guide the consultation during the project implementation.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      The environmental and social risks to cultural heritage are currently considered to be low at this stage and will be
                      thoroughly assessed during the preparation phase. The downstream implementation of some Technical Assistance
                      (TA) activities, such as Emission Reduction Program, may have impacts on ESS8. Therefore, the Terms of Reference
                      for TA and related capacity building activities will need to incorporate the objectives of ESS8 and other relevant ESSs
                      to ensure that activities and outputs align with the World Bank Environmental and Social Framework. This will be
                      reflected in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      Not applicable as it will not involve any financial intermediaries in any of its TA activities.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply



                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Second Community Action For Landscape Management Program For Results (P510697)



                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                     No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                              No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                     In Part
                       The IPF component aims to strengthen and enhance the borrower framework at national, regional and woreda levels
                       for improving the environmental and social risk management system associated with the program implementation.
                       When the environmental and social systems assessment (ESSA) is updated during preparation, specific environmental
                       and social actions for improving the borrower ES framework related to the PforR component will be identified. These
                       findings and recommended actions will then be integrated into the Program action plan.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                            No
                       Not relevant currently.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     • Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) (including LMP with simple OHS protocol, SEA/SH and SMP
                     provisions)



Public Disclosure
                     • A standalone Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP), including a GRM and a record of the stakeholder engagement
                     activities carried out until then.

                     Implementation phase:
                     • Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for Emission Reduction Program (ERP), focusing on generating
                     carbon assets from landscape management (including forests and non-forests, excluding protected areas) will be
                     prepared during the implementation phase.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:     Pablo Cesar Benitez Ponce                Title:        Lead Natural Resources Management
                                                                                                   Specialist

                      Email:                pbenitez@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:          Shewakena Aytenfisu Abab                 Job Title:    Senior Environmental Specialist



                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                  Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Second Community Action For Landscape Management Program For Results (P510697)



                      Email:                  sabab@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Million Alemayehu Gizaw               Job Title:    Sr Natural Resources Mgmt. Spec.

                      Email:                  malemayehugizaw@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):               Pablo Cesar Benitez Ponce, Shewakena Aytenfisu Abab, Million Alemayehu Gizaw

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:      Dereje Agonafir Habtewold

                     ADM Social Specialist:             Solomon Soroto Tanto, Chalie Kassa Mengistu




Public Disclosure




                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                Page 9 of 9
