Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Pakistan Finance For Lowering Emissions In The Water And Waste Sectors (P510667)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 06/28/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05041




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jun 29, 2025                                                                                Page 1 of 6
                              The World Bank
                              Pakistan Finance For Lowering Emissions In The Water And Waste Sectors (P510667)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510667                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        Pak-FLOW                     2026

                     Operation Name            Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in the Water and Waste Sectors

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Pakistan                  Pakistan                                 SOUTH ASIA                    Water


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Economic      Ministry of Climate Change               10-Dec-2025                   17-Mar-2026
                     Affairs

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date




Public Disclosure
                     20-Jun-2025               40,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective is to monetize greenhouse gas emissions reduced in the water and waste sectors in
                     selected areas of Pakistan


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Pakistan Finance for Lowering Emissions in Water Sector (Pak-FLOW) is strategically aligned with Pakistan's Country
                     Partnership Framework (CPF), addressing key objectives across multiple outcomes to foster sustainable development
                     and climate resilience. Specifically, it fulfills the objectives of CPF Outcome 4: Increased Decarbonization, and supported
                     by the World Bank’s Transformative Carbon Asset Facility (TCAF). The Pak-FLOW project will support decarbonization
                     through reducing methane emissions from wastewater treatment processes by converting the biogas to energy,
                     promote energy efficiency measures in water pumping and the supply of clean renewable energy from solar panels. The



                    Jun 29, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                              The World Bank
                              Pakistan Finance For Lowering Emissions In The Water And Waste Sectors (P510667)



                     project incorporates a robust Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) system to ensure integrity and continuous
                     improvement of envisaged operations, ensuring its long-term sustainability.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Pak-FLOW is an Emission Reduction Crediting (ERC-formerly Carbon Finance) Project that will involve results-based
                     payments made to the Government for generated, monitored, verified and transferred ERs or Mitigation Outcomes.
                     These will be generated under two WB funded projects: Punjab Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (PRWSSP-
                     P169071) and Solid Waste Emergency and Efficiency Project (SWEEP-P173021). The project will include various
                     investment activities, capacity building interventions to leverage carbon finance and mitigation outcomes calculated ex
                     post against a certain business-as-usual GHG emissions baseline or reference level. In light of above, the geographical
                     scope corresponds to that of these two WB projects, which will receive the payments, specifically: PRWSSP- 16 districts
                     of Punjab and SWEEP- Jam Chakro landfill site, Karachi, Sindh. Whilst PRWSSP is under Bank’s Safeguards policy, with a
                     Moderate ESRC, SWEEP conforms to Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) policy having a High ESRC. A preliminary
                     assessment indicates that both the projects have a well-established Environmental and Social management system in
                     place for screening all E&S risks and impacts including the preparation of subsequent E&S instruments proportionate to
                     the nature and risks of the projects, institutional arrangements for managing the associated risks at both the Project
                     Implementation Unit (PIU) level, design and supervision firm as well as at Contractors level. Closure timeline for SWEEP
                     is January 2027 and for PRSWSSP is December 2028, while Pak-FLOW’s end date is 2030. Post project closure, client
                     implementing agencies, Karachi Waste Management Board (KWMB) and Punjab Rural and Municipal Services Company
                     (PRMSC) will be responsible for E&S supervision. This will be further evaluated during the project preparation.



Public Disclosure
                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of Climate Change (MoCC), Planning and Development Departments (P&DDs) Sindh and Punjab, through
                     the existing PIUs of PRSWSSP and SWEEP will implement the proposed operation. MoCC, as a focal point for Article 6 of
                     the Paris Agreement, is the lead implementing agency and will collaborate with other departments and PIUs involved.
                     While MoCC has limited capacity to manage E&S risks, implementation of emission reduction activities will be done by
                     PRSWSSP and SWEEP - both having satisfactory capacity in managing E&S risks so far. MoCC will rely on both these
                     projects to report on E&S risks management while for rudimentary ESF compliance, MoCC will hire staff who will be
                     trained in E&S requirements. As such, amongst the three IA, borrower capacity for managing E&S risks is adequate.
                     Closure timeline for SWEEP is January 2027 and for PRSWSSP is December 2028, while Pak-FLOW’s end date is 2030.
                     After each project ends, the provincial government will continue managing the investments and earning Emissions
                     Reductions (ERs). SWEEP contractual arrangement has one year O&M post-WB project in the contract and after that
                     SWMB will run the landfill facility. ERs will be processed through SWMB and EPA (whom GoSindh has already decided to
                     mandate the role of climate financing for the whole province). In PRWSSP, the public owned Section-42 company under
                     the Securities Exchange Commission of Pakistan will continue to exist as a Rural Utility to manage O&M of project
                     investments and earn climate finance. The SWMB and PRMSC will continue to ensure safeguards compliance of ERs post
                     2028. This will be further evaluated in the project preparation phase.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                      Substantial



                    Jun 29, 2025                                                                                                    Page 3 of 6
                              The World Bank
                              Pakistan Finance For Lowering Emissions In The Water And Waste Sectors (P510667)




                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     The Environmental Risk Rating is assessed as Substantial at the Concept stage. This is attributed to the novelty of the
                     Article 6 mechanism, uncertainties around MRV implementation, limited institutional capacity, and the fact that the
                     ESMS's of parent projects might not be followed due to possible project end (in event of no project extension) before
                     the proposed Carbon Finance IPF (this project) ends. The project supports an Emission Reduction Credit (ERC)
                     transaction under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement and will generate payments based on verified emission reductions
                     from two underlying World Bank-financed operations: PRWSSP (P169071) and SWEEP, (P173021). The due diligence
                     approach focuses not on the safeguards performance of individual activities but rather on the capacity and
                     effectiveness of the Environmental and Social (E&S) Management Systems in place to manage these activities, in line
                     with ERC guidance. The project will not support or design any kind of physical interventions/civil works or
                     procurement of goods. It is important to note that the emissions reduction activities under component 1 will not be
                     financed under Pak-FLOW and will be undertaken by the respective parent projects (PRWSSP & SWEEP) themselves.
                     Accordingly, the all associated environmental risks will be addressed by the respective parent project in accordance
                     with World Bank Safeguards/ESF policy. Any residual E&S risks of underlying projects will be addressed by the
                     relevant E&S ADMs, by identifying any actions in the Post Closure Action Plans (PCAPs) and this information will be
                     shared with Pak-FLOW and MoCC for documentation purposes. All of this will be evaluated and revalidated in the
                     project preparation.
                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk is also rated Substantial, reflecting broader institutional and systemic risks rather than direct social



Public Disclosure
                     impacts of individual project level activities. The project itself does not finance infrastructure or goods, and
                     downstream risks remain the responsibility of the parent IPF projects. However, potential risks include insufficient
                     institutional capacity at the federal level (particularly MoCC), challenges in stakeholder identification and
                     engagement, labor-related issues at MoCC, and maintaining consistency in E&S implementation across the ER-
                     generating activities. Post project closure management of the carbon credits is also unclear at this stage. This added
                     with the novelty of the Article 6 mechanism, justifies Substantial risk rating at the concept stage.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant. The project supports payments for ERs from two Bank-financed IPF operations (PRSWSSP and
                      SWEEP), both with satisfactory E&S systems. In line with ERC guidance, the focus is on assessing the adequacy of E&S
                      management systems rather than individual activities. PIUs are staffed with E&S specialists and implement approved
                      ESMPs. A Bank-executed TA will support MoCC in building oversight capacity (including E&S) and operationalizing
                      Pakistan’s carbon market guidelines. Systems assessment to be carried out during preparation will identify additional
                      E&S requirements, including additional E&S staffing or training as required within MoCC and relevant departments.
                      These measures will ensure that environmental and social risks associated with ERC activities are appropriately




                    Jun 29, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                              The World Bank
                              Pakistan Finance For Lowering Emissions In The Water And Waste Sectors (P510667)



                      identified, managed, and monitored. Third-party monitoring and MRV systems will also ensure E&S compliance.
                      These will be further elaborated in the preparation phase and added to the ESCP of the Project.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                    Relevant

                      A Stakeholder Engagement Plan will be prepared by the Appraisal. This Plan will adapt from the Plans of PRSWSSP
                      and SWEEP, and will identify and add additional stakeholders at the Federal level.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                          Relevant

                      The Project's workforce will be limited to civil servants and contracted workers/consultants. As the Project does not
                      finance any physical works or goods procurement, labor-related risks are inherently minimized. During preparation, a
                      comprehensive assessment will be conducted to evaluate the availability and effectiveness of grievance redress
                      mechanisms for labor. Should gaps be identified in existing grievance mechanisms, appropriate provisions will be
                      suggested to ensure compliance with ESS2. As part of the SEP, an accessible GRM will be established at the MoCC
                      including provisions for handling SEA/SH related complaints.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                            Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                            Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                Not Currently Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                 Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional            Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                      Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                               Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            No
                       The Borrower’s E&S Framework will not be used for this project. In line with the Environmental and Social guidance
                       for Emission Reduction Credit (ERC) projects, the Bank's due diligence focuses on the assessment of E&S systems of


                    Jun 29, 2025                                                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                               The World Bank
                               Pakistan Finance For Lowering Emissions In The Water And Waste Sectors (P510667)



                       the underlying activities, in this case of Bank financed two operations, rather than applying country systems to the
                       ERC operation itself. An overview of PRSWSSP and SWEEP E&S performance indicates that the E&S systems of the
                       implementing entities are adequate and functioning. Nevertheless, a detailed E&S systems assessment will be carried
                       out during project preparation to confirm this, and to identify any capacity or policy gaps, which will be accordingly
                       filled.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Systems Assessment, ESCP and SEP


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Mohammad Farhanullah Sami             Title:          Senior Water Supply and Sanitation



Public Disclosure
                                                                                                    Specialist

                      Email:                  msami1@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                          Mohammad Farhanullah Sami

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                 Nida Asif

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                        Babar Naseem Khan




                    Jun 29, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 6
