Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                       Project Information Document (PID)

Public Disclosure Authorized



           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01541




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Parana Water Security Project (P510227)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)        Region                      Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                          LATIN AMERICA AND                                          Parana Water Security
                          Brazil                                                      P510227
                                                          CARIBBEAN                                                  Project
                          Financing Instrument            Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                          17-Nov-2025                 02-Jul-2026                    Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                     Implementing Agency
                                                          State Secretariat of
                          State of Parana
                                                          Planning - SEPL

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)




_For Official Use Only_
                          The Project Development Objectives are to: (a) strengthen the State of Parana's capacity to collaboratively manage
                          water security risks in a changing climate and (b) increase people's resilience to those risks in targeted areas by
                          implementing integrated and cross-sectoral interventions.

                          Components
                          Strengthen climate-informed WRM
                          Enhance water security in agriculture and reduce associated risks
                          Reduce water security risk for universal WSS access
                          Support Project Management

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                            268.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                                 268.00
                                          of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              186.00
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00


                                                                                                                                                Page 1



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Parana Water Security Project (P510227)



                           DETAILS
                               World Bank Group Financing
                                International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                  186.00
                               Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                Counterpart Funding                                                                                             36.87
                                  Borrower/Recipient                                                                                            36.87
                                Commercial Financing                                                                                            45.13
                                  Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                             45.13




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification




_For Official Use Only_
                          Moderate


                           Decision




                          Other Decision (as needed)




                          B. Introduction and Context

                          Project Strategic Context
                          1.      Paraná has a dynamic economy and job market heavily reliant on agribusiness and water. In 2024, the state
                          accounted for 2.3 percent of Brazil’s land area, 5.6 percent of its population and 6.1 per cent of its Gross Domestic Product
                          (GDP). Of its 11.8 million residents, 89 percent live in urban settings, with 30 percent in the Curitiba metropolitan area,
                          the capital. Parana is Brazil’s fourth largest state economy and fifth largest exporter, primarily due to its dynamic
                          agribusiness which accounts for 30-35 percent of the state’s GDP and makes up nearly 80 percent of exports, making
                          Parana a key contributor to national and global food security. Agribusiness accounts for 40 percent of Paraná’s workforce,
                          with one-quarter in agriculture and three-quarters in mostly urban agro-industries and services. The sector relies heavily
                          on water for production and worker health. As a major producer of animal protein, grains, and sugarcane, Paraná's
                          agriculture needs ample, quality water, while related industries and services depend on reliable water supply services for
                          their operations and exports.
                          2.       Rapid agribusiness and urban expansion have generated jobs and improved living conditions in Paraná, yet they



                                                                                                                                                   Page 2



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Parana Water Security Project (P510227)


                           have also increased exposure to water security1 risks, threatening the state’s economic and jobs base. Decades of
                           intensive agriculture and expanding urban areas, combined with climate change, have driven soil and water resources
                           degradation undermining the natural capital on which agribusiness depends. This degradation also impacts water supply
                           services in rural and urban areas, which support industrial and service sectors, and poses risks to public health and labor
                           productivity. Climate change has been amplifying these vulnerabilities, with more intense rainfall events, floods and
                           droughts causing increasing economic, jobs and incomes losses. Together, these pressures are driving an escalation of
                           water security risks, that underscore the need to shift toward more environmentally responsible, climate-resilient
                           models, a direction already emphasized in recent state strategies and plans.
                           3.      Improving water security is essential to the State development strategy for continued socio-economic progress
                           and enabling and protecting jobs across Parana. Water security generates more and better jobs by being part of the
                           foundation on which the State’s economy depends: (a) healthy soil and water resources that underpin agriculture
                           production and (b) resilient and safely managed water supply and sanitation infrastructure that keep industry and
                           services running and maintain a healthy, productive labor force. Water security also protects jobs by reducing exposure
                           and increasing resilience to intensive rainfall, floods and droughts that can halt production, disrupt supply chains and
                           trigger unemployment.
                           4.      Enhancing water security requires strong institutions capable of coordinating multisectoral, integrated responses
                           across public and private organizations and of providing predictability and incentives for the private sector to plan and
                           invest in a responsible manner. Paraná has a solid legal framework defining the organizations and rules/incentives to




_For Official Use Only_
                           support such integration and private-sector engagement for water security. Fully operationalizing this framework
                           requires strengthening existing organizations’ capacity and coordination mechanisms, better management tools and
                           information, and a more skilled workforce across public agencies, service providers, and agricultural producers, together
                           with greater mobilization of private-sector financing and innovation.
                           5.      This Project, which aims to enhance water security for sustained economic growth, job creation and better
                           living standards, tackles challenges faced by many agribusiness economies that play a role in global food security. It
                           has the potential to bring valuable lessons and innovations to other states and countries in Brazil, Latin America and
                           beyond, notably through its contributions to AgriConnect and Mission Water, two recent World Bank Group initiatives,
                           to build the foundations for growth and jobs as a mean to reduce poverty and bring prosperity.
                           Sectoral and Institutional Context
                          6.       Climate change risks and vulnerability in the state have been increasing with strong impacts on water security.
                          Climate change has been increasing the frequency and intensity of droughts and floods, the former being a relatively new
                          issue, and structural water deficit, a few months a year, particularly in the northwest (NW) of the state and the
                          Metropolitan area. Climate change has also increased the intensity of rainfall, increasing soil erosion in rural and peri-
                          urban areas. Those have resulted in heavy losses in agricultural production, reduction in hydropower generation,
                          disruptions in water supply and sanitation services affecting not only human health and wellbeing, but also the industrial
                          and services sectors that depend on them. For instance, during the 2021/2022 drought, precipitation dropped to 50 per
                          cent, inducing R$ 31 billion losses in agricultural production (about 25 per cent of agriculture GDP); and rationing of water
                          supply services in the metropolitan area for 649 days. In 2023, torrential rains and floods affected 500,000 people with
                          damages estimated at R$ 2.1 billion. More generally over the past 15 years, more than 5,000 hydro-meteorologic extreme
                          events have affected people and the economy. Climate change projections indicate that droughts, seasonal water
                          shortages, intensive rainfall and floods will further intensify, with the greatest impacts of droughts and seasonal water
                          shortages expected in the northwest, southwest, north regions and metropolitan area, and the greatest impacts of floods

                          1 In this Project, water security means: healthy water and soil resources, universal access to resilient water and sanitation services, resilience to

                          floods, droughts and intensive rainfall.

                                                                                                                                                                              Page 3



                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Parana Water Security Project (P510227)


                          in the northwest and Metropolitan area. The proposed Project intends to manage those climate change risks by increasing
                          the state capacity to manage water security risks and increase resilience to those risks in selected areas.
                          8.    Water security risks are particularly problematic in agriculture and potable water, sectors vital to the state’s
                          economy & jobs and especially vulnerable to these risks, while also contributing to them.
                          9.       The agriculture sector is highly vulnerable to climate change-exacerbated water security risks. Parana has about
                          350,000 farms covering an area of about 10 million ha, of which only 13 percent are managed by women. Family farms,
                          which account for 70 percent of farms, but occupy less than 30 percent of the land, are particularly vulnerable due to
                          relatively limited access to agriculture innovation and extension services, financial resources, and modern technologies.
                          There is a pronounced gap in the adoption and sustained implementation of sustainable agricultural practices, translating
                          in the low resilience of agriculture to climate and water risks, especially in the northwest region characterized by sandy
                          soils, prone to erosion, with low fertility and water retention capacity.
                          10.      The agriculture sector is also partly responsible for increased water insecurity. Decades of intensification in
                          agricultural production have heightened water security risks for all. Agriculture contributes to water security risks through
                          pollution from agrochemicals and animal waste, increased water withdrawals for irrigation and animal use and overgrazing
                          and land degradation exacerbating both water deficits and contamination. Widespread soil degradation from agriculture,
                          especially in the sandy soils of the northwest, where only about a quarter of the land is under fully sustainable agricultural
                          practices, reduces resilience to droughts, heightens flood risks, and increases water contaminants in runoff. These trends




_For Official Use Only_
                          are likely to continue unless actions are taken.
                          11.     Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) services are vulnerable to climate change-exacerbated water security risks.
                          Parana is on track to reach universal access to safe WSS in urban areas, with currently 100 percent access rate for water
                          supply and 80 percent for sanitation (all wastewater collected is treated). However, some urban areas face risks at the
                          water source due to increased water demand and pollution, exacerbated by climate change. It is estimated that 37 percent
                          of urban centers face deficits to meet future water demand. Since most of the population lives in urban areas, and
                          urbanization will continue, it is critical to increase urban WSS systems resilience to those risks. In rural areas, access to
                          basic WSS is not universal. Available data indicates that only 17 percent of rural households have access to water supply
                          network, and just 2.5 percent have access to either a sewerage network or a septic tank, but the exact situation is unclear.
                          12.      Urban and industrial areas are also contributing to water insecurity in parts of the state, particularly in the
                          Metropolitan area and other rapidly urbanizing areas. While most urban wastewater/solid waste in the state are treated
                          or safely disposed (84 percent of urban population have access to sewage collection and treatment and 98 percent benefit
                          from solid waste collection services), there are still households, particularly in informal settlements, and industries that
                          discharge untreated wastewater/solid waste unsafely, ending-up polluting water bodies. Moreover, urban drainage
                          systems are not always properly designed to handle increasingly intense rainfall events, causing some flooding and
                          significant erosion at the drainage outlet in peri-urban areas, resulting in significant land degradation, damage to
                          infrastructure, water contamination and siltation of riverbeds and reservoirs.
                          13.     The proposed Project responds to Paraná’s strategy to generate jobs and improve living conditions by laying
                          the foundation for long-term water security under a changing climate while addressing pressing water security risks in
                          priority areas. To do so, the Project will adopt, multisectoral approach focusing on three interrelated topics: (a) the
                          sustainable management of water resources, which is the foundation of water security for people, the economy and
                          biodiversity as water is a shared and finite resource; (b) the water security for agriculture production, the main driver of
                          Parana’s economy, and, at the same time, the reduction of agriculture contribution to water security risks and (c) the
                          water security for WSS, increasing its resilience to climate risks and to support the universalization access goal, while
                          reducing WSS contribution to water security risks. It will lay the foundation for long-term water security by building the
                          State capacity and leveraging the private sector, strengthening policies, strategies, instruments, human resources and


                                                                                                                                                    Page 4



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Parana Water Security Project (P510227)


                          generating and disseminating information & innovation. Given the size of the State, the Project will address water security
                          risks in two priority areas in the Northwest and Alto Iguaçu watersheds which have been selected due to their pressing
                          water security risks. The Northwest region has the driest climate, sandy soils prone to erosion, with low fertility and water
                          storage capacity. This is the area where the agriculture production suffers the most in times of drought, where many urban
                          and rural water sources are at risk from contamination and deficits and where water erosion in rural and peri-urban areas
                          is the most acute. The second area is the Alto Iguaçu watershed where the Metropolitan Region is located, which is water
                          stressed due to high water demand and contaminant loads from the Metropolitan area. Water security challenges have
                          been intensifying in both areas due to climate change
                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)

                           14.     The Project Development Objectives are to: (a) strengthen the State of Parana's capacity to collaboratively
                           manage water security risks in a changing climate and (b) increase people's resilience to those risks in targeted areas
                           by implementing integrated and cross-sectoral interventions.


                            Key Results
                          15.       Achievement of the Project’s results will be measured with the following PDO-level indicators:




_For Official Use Only_
                                    a)   Water security plans developed and implemented in a collaborative and integrated manner
                                    b)   RWSS State policy and plan for universal access developed and adopted
                                    c)   Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks2 (People, of which women and of which youth)
                                    d)   Landscapes under enhanced conservation and/or sustainable management (Ha)
                            D. Project Description
                          16.     The proposed Project is a US$268 million Investment Project Financing (IPF) operation, financed by a US$186
                          million IBRD loan, US$77 million in State counterpart funds & US$5 million from beneficiaries, with a six-year
                          implementation.
                          17.     Component 1 – Strengthening climate-informed WRM (US$76.49 million of which US$56.29 million IBRD
                          financing and US$20.20 million counterpart funds). By promoting a better integrated, participatory, resilient and data-
                          driven water resources governance and infrastructure, the component helps to alleviate pressures on water resources
                          and enhances preparedness and response to climate change risks. These efforts establish the institutional and technical
                          foundations for improved water security across the State, with a emphasis on priority areas where activities are
                          implemented in an integrated manner with other components.
                          18.      Subcomponent 1.1 – Modernizing water monitoring, information and management instruments to strengthen
                          the Borrower’s operational and technical capacity to manage water resources under intensifying hydrometeorological
                          events. Collectively, these activities will improve the availability and reliability of information and strengthen the State’s
                          ability to allocate, regulate, and protect water resources amid rising water demand, pollution and climate change.
                          19.      Subcomponent 1.2 – Improving integrated water resources governance to strengthen the Borrower’s
                          institutional capacity and participatory mechanisms to enhance water resources governance through the acquisition of
                          goods, the provision of services, studies and training for: (a) the development and implementation of an action plan to

                          2 This includes urban people with more climate resilient water sources; farmers with practices and technologies more resilient to dry spells, droughts

                          & intensive rainfall events; people more resilient to floods and intensive rainfall events; and people with improved access to potable water.
                          Disaggregated by gender and youth (15-24 for Bank Reporting) as well as young adults (25-29 for State reporting)

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 5



                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Parana Water Security Project (P510227)


                          strengthen the performance of SEGRH; (b) the preparation and implementation of a water communication plan to foster
                          compliance with the water management instruments, and (c) the implementation of basin level water use and effluent
                          discharge fees.
                          20.      Subcomponent 1.3 – Reducing urban and peri-urban erosion due to inadequate urban drainage and intensifying
                          rainfall events, integrating climate-resilient nature-based and conventional infrastructure solutions through civil works,
                          the acquisition of goods and the provision of services for: (a) the improvement of urban drainage systems and (b) the
                          restoration of degraded soil, including through bioengineering.
                          21.     Component 2 – Enhancing water security in agriculture and reducing associated risks (US$104.87 million, of
                          which US$83.38 million IBRD, US$16.49 million State counterpart funds and US$5.00 million from beneficiaries). This
                          component is designed to enhance water security for agriculture amid rising water shortages and land degradation, driven
                          by misuse and climate change. It also seeks to reduce the risks of water contamination and water shortages in selected
                          urban water sources associated with land degradation, agrochemical use, animal waste and climate change. Efforts will
                          center on strengthening institutional and technical capacities, leveraging partnerships with cooperatives and local
                          organizations, generating innovation and promoting the adoption of sustainable conservation and production practices.

                          22.      Subcomponent 2.1. – Strengthening the Borrower’s capacity to manage water security risks in agriculture. This
                          subcomponent supports the shift to sustainable agricultural production systems suited to the edaphoclimatic conditions
                          of the NW region, aiming to improve water security in both rural and urban areas. This will be achieved through the




_For Official Use Only_
                          capacity building of SEAB and linked institutions (IDR and ADAPAR) and enhanced integrated agricultural research and
                          extension services to develop, transfer, and scale-up the adoption of technical references for sustainable and irrigated
                          agriculture.
                          23.      Subcomponent 2.2. – Enhancing water security of family agriculture in the Northwest region. where water
                          shortages and soil degradation are worsened by climate change, through the adoption sustainable agriculture
                          technologies and practices, including through: (a) the provision of services for communication and outreach related to the
                          Project, (b) technical assistance to Family Farmers to prepare and implement Integrated Farm Plans (plano integrado de
                          propiedade, PIP) aimed at the adoption of sustainable agriculture technologies and practices, (c) carrying out Investment
                          Sub-Projects, financed through Matching Grants, for the implementation of Integrated Farms Plans and (d) the acquisition
                          of goods, the provision of services and Operational Costs for the monitoring and evaluation of the Investment Sub-Projects
                          mentioned in (c).
                          24.     Subcomponent 2.3. – Reducing agriculture contribution to water security risks in selected watersheds for urban
                          water sources. This subcomponent addresses the impact of agricultural activities by both large and small farmers on water
                          security risks in selected watersheds that supply urban water sources in Northwest Parana. Multisectoral, integrated
                          planning at the watershed level will guide interventions to improve urban water sources, with a committee overseeing
                          monitoring & evaluation. Command-and-control measures and incentives will promote resource conservation, sustainable
                          agriculture, farm-level WSS systems and sustainable farm waste management. Off-farm actions in the watershed plans
                          may be included in state or municipal programs. Rural roads that cause significant erosion may be upgraded by the Project.
                          25.      Component 3 – Reducing water security risk for universal WSS access (US$85.31 million of which US$45.00
                          million IBRD financing and US$40.31 million counterpart funds). This component seeks to enhance the climate resilience,
                          quality, and availability of WSS by reducing water security risks in selected watersheds of urban water sources and
                          addressing both infrastructure and management model gaps in rural areas, in support of the universalization goals.
                          26.     Subcomponent 3.1 – Reducing water security risks in selected watersheds of urban water sources. This
                          subcomponent supports the implementation of SANEPAR’s Water Safety Plan, focusing on activities to manage risks at
                          the level of the water sources that face growing water demand and pollution and heightened vulnerability from climate
                          change. It also complements subcomponent 2.3 that supports improvements in farming practices and technologies to

                                                                                                                                                Page 6



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Parana Water Security Project (P510227)


                          reduce water pollution and deficit risks in the selected watersheds.
                          27.     Subcomponent 3.2 – Increase access to sustainable rural water and sanitation services. This subcomponent aims
                          to advance the universalization of WSS in rural areas, improving their climate resilience and ensuring their long-term
                          sustainability.
                          28.    Component 4 – Project Management (US$1.33 million, fully IBRD financed). This component strengthens the
                          Borrower’s capacity to carry out the Project with respect to technical, financial management, audit, procurement,
                          environmental and social aspects and monitoring and evaluation. It provides funding for technical assistance, consulting
                          and non-consulting services, training, operating costs, and necessary goods.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          Yes
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




_For Official Use Only_
                          29.     The Project’s environmental risk is Moderate. It is expected to generate significant positive environmental
                          outcomes by improving water quality & availability through integrated watershed management & nature-based
                          solutions, contributing to the restoration of riparian & native vegetation, supporting biodiversity, and strengthening
                          climate resilience with adaptation and mitigation co-benefits. The promotion of sustainable agriculture, efficient
                          irrigation, and enhanced rural sanitation will help reduce erosion and pollution, while restoration efforts will benefit
                          sensitive ecosystems such as aquatic habitats, riparian vegetation, wetlands, and fragments of Atlantic Forest. The
                          anticipated environmental impacts include localized, predictable, temporary, and/or reversible effects that can be
                          managed with standard measures & good international construction practices, as well as potential modest cumulative
                          impacts, related to modest expansion of water-efficient, supplemental irrigation. To mitigate these impacts, guidelines
                          for the identification of potential cumulative impacts will be incorporated into the updating of the State Water Resources
                          Plan and River Basin Plans, and in the elaboration of the State Rural Sanitation Policy. Moreover, irrigation expansion will
                          be conditioned to the obtention of a water right which considers cumulative water uses in the river basins/aquifer.
                          Moreover, the Project will strengthen water use monitoring and water rights enforcement in the Project area. Key
                          localized risks include construction-related soil erosion & sedimentation; temporary noise; solid waste and effluent
                          management, especially in areas of accelerated urbanization; and operational risks such as altered aquatic habitats and
                          ecological flows, pollution from agrochemicals and wastewater, and localized loss of native vegetation. Sensitive
                          receptors include aquatic ecosystems, riparian vegetation, artificial wetlands and fragments of Atlantic Forest, whose
                          ecological connectivity and conservation require special attention. The Project considers standards ESS1–ESS8, ESS10 as
                          relevants, as well as compliance with OP 7.50 on International Waterways, given activities in the Paraná River and its
                          tributaries (Ivaí, Iguaçu, Piquiri, and Pirapó), which are part of the La Plata Basin and the Serra Geral Aquifer. The
                          mitigation approach follows the mitigation hierarchy—avoiding sensitive areas whenever possible, ensuring ecological
                          flows, employing nature-based solutions and low-impact irrigation, and implementing robust measures for pollution
                          prevention, occupational health and safety, community health and safety (including dam safety), and biodiversity
                          conservation. These actions are supported by an Environmental and Social Management Framework, whose final version
                          will be available 30 days after the effective date (with subproject ESIAs/ESMPs as required by Brazil’s three-stage


                                                                                                                                                  Page 7



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Parana Water Security Project (P510227)


                          environmental licensing and complementary instruments), an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan with
                          monitoring and reporting provisions, and institutional mechanisms to ensure effective implementation and oversight of
                          the proposed measures.
                          30.     The Project’s social risk is rated as Moderate. Key risks include potential challenges in ensuring the meaningful
                          participation of vulnerable and culturally distinct groups in water governance and decision-making processes; limited
                          capacity of smallholder and family farmers—particularly women, Indigenous Peoples, and traditional communities—to
                          benefit from the Project’s activities; possible land acquisition and temporary economic losses associated with drainage
                          and wetland works; and potential restrictions on land or natural resource use for spring protection. Civil works under
                          Components 1 and 3 may also pose risks related to worker conduct (including SEA/SH), occupational and community
                          health and safety, and increased traffic hazards. Gender Action Plan, which incorporates a SEA/SH Prevention Plan, will
                          be elaborated as a part of the ESMF. Social risks will be mitigated through the implementation of robust environmental
                          and social instruments and compliance with national and World Bank standards. Civil works will follow Brazilian
                          Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) regulations, including traffic management, community communication, and the
                          use of proper protective equipment, while prioritizing local firms and labor to minimize labor influx. Land acquisition,
                          expected to be limited, will be managed under a Resettlement Framework consistent with ESS5, guiding the preparation
                          of site-specific Resettlement Action Plans as needed. The Project will rely on existing dams and focus on dam safety
                          monitoring, with minimal community health and safety impacts. Indigenous Peoples will be consulted when relevant, as
                          detailed in the ESMF, SEP, and ESCP. A comprehensive Stakeholder Engagement Plan will promote inclusive participation,




_For Official Use Only_
                          leveraging existing participatory state councils composed of civil society organizations and state agencies and IDR’s
                          engagement methodologies to ensure the inclusion of vulnerable groups and prevent elite capture. An inclusive, GBV-
                          sensitive Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will also be established leveraging the State of Paraná’s OGE and
                          SANEPAR’s Ombudsman and the SEP will be finalized within 30 days after the Effective Date and implemented throughout
                          Project execution.


                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                          55.      The SEPL will be responsible for overall Project implementation and coordination with other participating
                          institutions. It will house the PMU, under the Coordination Unit for Fundraising (Coordinação de Captação de Recursos,
                          CCR), which will be created by State decree and regulated by resolution from SEPL. The PMU will be responsible for Project
                          coordination, supervision and reporting on Project activities and results; perform technical, fiduciary and administrative
                          functions; as well as supervise and support the four implementing agencies in fulfilling their Project responsibilities, in
                          compliance with Project Operation Manual (POM), regulations and World Bank policies. It will oversee monitoring &
                          evaluation (M&E), environmental & social management and procurement and financial management, and prepare
                          financial reports (IFRs) and disbursement requests, based on inputs from participating institutions. The PMU Key Staff will
                          be a mixed of civil servants and consultants and will include a general coordinator, a deputy coordinator and six thematic
                          specialists for procurement, financial management, M&E, environment and social aspects, as well as a social
                          communication specialist. External consultants may provide additional support.
                          56.       ADAPAR, IAT, IDR, SANEPAR, SEAB and SEPL will be responsible for implementing Project activities under their
                          purview. For this purpose, two PIUs will be established: one within SEAB, with sub-units in ADAPAR and IDR, and one in
                          IAT, with functions, resources and composition acceptable to the Bank, as further detailed in the POM. SANEPAR will hire
                          or designate a Project Coordinator Focal Point with functions and resources acceptable to the Bank, as further detailed in
                          the POM. Table 2 indicates the activities under the responsibility of each implementing agency. PIUs will be composed of
                          civil servants and consultants dedicated to carrying out the Project's activities and focal points for working together with

                                                                                                                                                  Page 8



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Parana Water Security Project (P510227)


                          PMU. PIUs are responsible for the implementation of Project activities, procurement, financial management,
                          environmental and social risk management, and monitoring. PIUs will include a sector coordinator and specialists for
                          technical, financial, monitoring, procurement, environmental, and social areas. At least some members of the PIUs will
                          work exclusively for the Project.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Marie-Laure Lajaunie
                             Lead Water Resources Management Specialist

                             Irene Natalia Wasilevsky
                             Senior Agriculture Economist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            State of Parana




_For Official Use Only_
                           Implementing Agencies
                            State Secretariat of Planning - SEPL

                           FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                           The World Bank
                           1818 H Street, NW
                           Washington, D.C. 20433
                           Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                           Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                           APPROVAL


                           Task Team Leader(s):                     Marie-Laure Lajaunie, Irene Natalia Wasilevsky

                           Approved By

                           Practice Manager/Manager:

                           Country Director:                        Jorge A. Coarasa                        10-Dec-2025




                                                                                                                                            Page 9



                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
