Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Republic of Panama



                                     Transforming Panama’s Cadastre (P511840)



                                             Program-for-Results (PforR)




Public Disclosure Authorized   Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                   February 5, 2025

                                             Prepared by the World Bank




                                                                                    Official Use Only
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

E&S             Environmental and social
AIG             Government Innovation Authority
ANATI           National Land Administration Authority
PNA             Natural Protected Areas
AR              Results Area
WB              The World Bank
CAU             User Service Center
CCR             Network Control Center
CNT             National Land Council
CORS            Continuously Operating Reference Station
SSC             Social Insurance Fund
DAF             Directorate of Administration and Finance
DE              Executive Decree
DGI             General Directorate of Revenue
DAY             Directorate of Environmental Information
DLI             Disbursement Linked Indicator
DNAM            National Directorate of Massive Adjudication
EIA             Environmental Impact Study
PPE             Personal Protective Equipment
ESSA/ESSA       Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
GoP             Government of Panama
has             hectare
IGNTG           Tommy Guardia National Geographic Institute
LADM            Land Administration Domain Model
LGA             General Law on the Environment
DGM             Memorandum of Understanding
MEF             Ministry of Economy and Finance
MyEnvironment   Ministry of Environment
MiCultura       Ministry of Culture
MINSA           MoH
MITRADEL        Ministry of Labor and Labor Development
MIVIOT          Ministry of Housing and Land Management
POM             Program Operations Manual
PAD             Program Appraisal Document
PAP             Program Action Plan
PDO             Program Development Objective(s )
PEG             Government Strategic Plan
PforR           Program-for-Results Financing
PRONAT          National Land Administration Program




                                                               Official Use Only
 PUMTT                Land Use and Management Plan to be titled
 WEEE                 Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment
 GIS                  Geographic information system
 SIICAR               Integrated Cadastre and Registry Information System
 SINAP                National System of Protected Areas
 SINAPROC             National Civil Protection System
 SINIA                National Environmental Information System
 OHS                  Occupational safety and health
 ICT                  Information and Communication Technologies




* This document was translated using AI. In case of discrepancies, please refer to the original version in Spanish as
the authoritative source.




                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................................6
1.      INTRODUCTION..........................................................................................................................8

     1.1.        Purpose of the ESSA ............................................................................................................... 8

     1.2.        ESSA methodology ................................................................................................................. 9

2.      PROGRAM DESCRIPTION .......................................................................................................... 10

     2.1.        Government Program........................................................................................................... 10

     2.2.        Program-for-Results (PforR) .................................................................................................. 11
        2.2.1.          Program Development Objectives (PDOs) .......................................................................................... 11
        2.2.2.          Scope and geographic coverage of the multi-purpose cadastre. ....................................................... 11
        2.2.3.          Results Areas and Main Activities ....................................................................................................... 11
        2.2.4.          Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs) ................................................................................................ 12

     2.2.5.     Selection of pilots for activities related to collective land titling and the Information System
     for Indigenous Territories ................................................................................................................. 12

     2.3.        Institutional Arrangements for the Implementation of the PforR ........................................... 13
        2.3.1.          Executing Agency ................................................................................................................................. 13
        2.3.2.          Other involved entities relevant to E&S management ....................................................................... 14

3.      ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASPECTS OF THE PforR .............................................................. 16

     3.1.        PforR Activities Associated with Potential Environmental, Social, Health and Safety Risks ...... 16

     3.2.        List of activities excluded from PforR .................................................................................... 16
     3.3.        PforR Environmental and Social Risk Analysis ....................................................................... 18
     3.4.        Expected environmental benefits ......................................................................................... 19

     3.5.        Potential Adverse Environmental and Health Safety Effects ................................................... 19

     3.6.        Expected social benefits ....................................................................................................... 22

     3.7.        Possible adverse social effects .............................................................................................. 23

4.      ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS APPLICABLE TO THE PforR
        28

     4.1.        Key Program Implementing Agencies and Partners ................................................................ 28

     4.2.        PforR Environmental and OHS Policy and Regulatory Framework .......................................... 34
     4.3.        Normative and Regulatory Framework Social ........................................................................ 41

     4.4.        ANATI's Social Institutional Framework ................................................................................. 46




                                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
     4.5.      Assessment against the core principles of the PforR .............................................................. 47

5.      E&S MEASURES TO BE INTEGRATED INTO THE PAP .................................................................... 56

     5.1.      E&S management measures ................................................................................................. 56
     5.2. Actions on the PAP .................................................................................................................... 64

13. ENVIRONMENTAL, OHS, AND SOCIAL RECOMMENDATIONS ....................................................... 66

14. SUMMARY OF CONSULTATION PROCESS TO INFORM THE ESA .................................................... 67

15. REFERENCES............................................................................................................................. 70
16. ANNEXES ................................................................................................................................. 71




                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Program for Results Transforming the Cadastre Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA)
analyzes the capacity of the GoP's institutional, regulatory, and operational framework to manage
environmental, social, occupational health and safety (OHS) risks associated with the implementation of
the National Multi-Purpose Cadastre System. The assessment is conducted under the World Bank Policy
and Directive on Program-for-Results (PforR) to assess the consistency of country systems with the core
principles of the instrument and to identify actions needed to strengthen risk management during
implementation.

The Program is led by the National Land Administration Authority (ANATI), which has the exclusive legal
mandate to manage, regulate, and modernize the national cadastre. The PforR will support the transition to
a single, digital, interoperable, and multi-purpose cadastral system aligned with international standards such
as the Land Administration Domain Model (LADM). Activities include geodetic and cartographic
modernization, information digitization, institutional strengthening, development of SIICAR, systematic
cadastre surveys, and titling processes in prioritized municipalities. These interventions have the potential
to improve territorial governance, legal certainty, fiscal efficiency, and environmental and urban planning.

The ESSA identifies that Panama's environmental and social regulatory framework is solid and has led
institutions with clear competencies: MiAmbiente in environmental matters, MiCultura in cultural heritage,
SINAPROC in disaster risk management, Ministry of the Interior and Vice-Ministry of Indigenous Affairs
in issues related to indigenous territories and peoples, and management of border conflicts. MITRADEL
and CSS in OHS, and MINSA in sanitary conditions. However, there are significant gaps in the institutional
capacity of ANATI to consistently apply these frameworks during Program implementation. In particular,
ANATI does not have an environmental unit or specialized OHS staff, and its social management
mechanisms—including consultation, participation, dispute resolution, and grievance redress—need
strengthening to meet standards acceptable to the Bank.

From an environmental perspective, activities with potential adverse impacts include: (i) installation of
CORS stations in urban and rural areas, some close to natural habitats; (ii) minor adjustments in existing
infrastructure; (iii) acquisition and installation of geodetic and mapping equipment; and (iv) titling
processes that could overlap with national forest heritage forests1 or environmentally sensitive areas, and
the potential for their degradation. Moreover, it is important to note that ANATI lacks a unit and/or
personnel with the technical capacity and resources to manage and supervise the environmental risks of the
Program, and the competent environmental authorities do not have sufficient resources and/or personnel to
guarantee the control and protection of natural habitats and habitats of interest for biodiversity on land titles
that have benefited from land titling.

In terms of OHS, the Program involves activities that require strict compliance with the Labor Code, the
OHS Regulations and the guidelines of MITRADEL, CSS and MINSA. Infrastructure adaptations, the use

1 The national forest heritage is managed by MiAmbiente's Forest Directorate and includes natural forests, state forest lands and

plantations established with the State.

                                                                                                                               6


                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
of specialized equipment, and fieldwork for cadastral surveys require occupational risk prevention
protocols, operational institutional OHS committees, and incident reporting and follow-up mechanisms,
elements that are currently not fully institutionalized in ANATI.

On the social side, risks are also considered substantial. The social risks identified are related to: (i) the
identification of conflicts where possession is disputed both during the cadastral survey and prior to the
mass adjudication or collective titling of indigenous lands; (ii) the need to guarantee culturally appropriate
consultation processes with indigenous peoples; (iii) the effective inclusion of women and vulnerable
groups in the benefits of the Program; (iv) the institutional capacity to manage tenure complaints and
disputes; and (v) the potential exacerbation of social conflicts in areas with historical tensions over political-
administrative boundaries or territorial claims, particularly in indigenous areas. Although ANATI has
relevant units—the National Directorate of Indigenous Land, the Office for Equal Opportunities, and the
User Service Center—these require technical, procedural, and operational strengthening to meet standards
acceptable to the Bank.

The Program incorporates an exclusion list that ensures that activities with significant environmental or
social impacts will not be financed, such as interventions that generate loss or degradation of critical natural
habitats, affectations to protected areas or titling in environmentally sensitive areas, and activities that
generate adverse impacts or require the involuntary resettlement of indigenous peoples. This checklist is an
essential tool to ensure that the PforR operates within an acceptable risk threshold.

The ESSA concludes that the Program presents substantial and manageable environmental and social risks,
provided that institutional strengthening actions are implemented as included in the Program Action Plan
(PAP) aimed at: creating an environmental and OHS unit in ANATI; formalize coordination protocols with
governing entities; standardize consultation, participation, and dispute resolution processes; Strengthening
grievance mechanisms and ensure the integration of environmental, disaster risk, and social inclusion
criteria in cadastral and titling processes.

Overall, the ESSA determines that Panama's institutional and policy framework is suitable for the
implementation of the PforR, provided the proposed strengthening measures are implemented. The Program
has the potential to generate significant environmental and social benefits, including increased transparency
in territorial governance, reduction of tenure conflicts, strengthening of territorial planning, protection of
sensitive areas, and improved equitable access to cadastre and titling services.




                                                                                                                7


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
1. INTRODUCTION


In compliance with the World Bank (WB) Policy (OPS5.04-POL.125, 2024) and Directive (OPS5.04-
DIR.110, 2025), this Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) is hereby conducted. Its
objective is to present the findings and recommendations derived from the risk assessment conducted by
the World Bank with respect to the environmental and social management systems that govern the
implementation of the Program-for-Results "Multipurpose Cadastre of Panama (511840)." In the
preparation of the ESSA, an analysis of the legal and institutional aspects applicable to the PforR is carried
out in order to determine whether:

    •   Promote environmental and social sustainability in the design of the Program; avoid, minimize
        and/or mitigate adverse impacts, and promote informed decision-making in relation to the social
        and environmental impacts of the Program.
    •   Avoid, minimize and/or mitigate impacts on natural habitats or physical and cultural resources that
        could be affected by the Program.
    •   Adequately protect communities and workers against potential risks arising from activities such as:
        (i) construction and/or operation of facilities and other practices under the Program; (ii) Exposure
        to hazardous wastes and toxic products resulting from Program activities; and (iii) reconstruction
        or rehabilitation of infrastructure located in areas vulnerable to the impact of natural disasters.
    •   Adequately manage land acquisition and restriction of access to natural resources in such a way as
        to avoid or minimize displacement and social and economic impacts by assisting affected groups
        to improve or at least restore their pre-Program living conditions.
    •   They guarantee that the rights and interests of indigenous and vulnerable groups are taken into
        account through their informed participation in the decisions of the Program that may affect them,
        while at the same time guaranteeing equitable and culturally appropriate access to the benefits of
        the Program.
    •   They avoid exacerbating social conflicts, especially in fragile territories and areas with social
        conflicts or territorial disputes.

1.1.Purpose of the ESSA

The purpose of this ESSA is to: (i) identify potential environmental and social (E&S) risks that may affect
the achievement of the Program's outcomes; (ii) assessing the Borrower's capacity to manage those risks,
including its legal framework, regulatory authority, organizational capacity, and performance, focusing on
environmental and social policies, legislation, procedures, and institutional systems to assess their
consistency with the World Bank Policy and Directive for PforR; and (iii) recommend specific actions to
strengthen the capacity of executing agencies with respect to the effective management of environmental,
health and safety, and social issues during implementation. These actions are normally established as
Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs), as part of the Program Action Plan (PAP), and/or as part of the
Program Operations Manual (POM).




                                                                                                            8


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
1.2. ESSA methodology

The ESSA is a World Bank document requirement for PforR investment operations and is prepared by WB
staff, in collaboration with the government of the borrowing country. In this PforR, the National Land
Administration Authority (ANATI) of the Government of Panama (GoP) will be the Program Implementing
Agency. It is carried out in accordance with the WB Guidance for ESSA preparation (OPS5.04-GUID.124,
2024). The findings, conclusions, and opinions expressed in the ESSA document are those of the WB. A
draft of the ESSA report will be shared with ANATI, and the comments and inputs received will be
incorporated into this report. The relevant comments received from the focus group consultation are in
Annex 1 of this ESSA. The methodology for the development of this ESSA is aligned with the provisions
of the WB Guidance prepared to conduct the ESSA for PforR financing operations. The methodology will
involve, at a minimum:

   •   Identification of potential environmental, health, and safety risks to workers and the population and
       social risks that may result from the activities to be supported by the PforR;
   •   Documentary review of the laws, regulations, requirements, and guidelines of the national systems
       in the area of SSM and social management to prevent or mitigate identified risks, provided by the
       client and/or consulted on the official websites of the relevant agencies of the Government of
       Panama;
   •   Hybrid meetings (in-person and virtual) during the preparation of the operation with representatives
       of the government agencies involved, including technical missions. These meetings provided a
       better understanding of the potential environmental and social risks associated with such activities
       and the capacity and procedure of government departments to address such risks, including the
       relevant measures currently taken in accordance with relevant laws and regulations;
   •   Review of documents generated by the WB during the preparation of the PforR, such as the
       Program Concept Note, the Program Appraisal Document (PAD), and Aide Memoires of the
       preparation missions conducted;
   •   Review of ESSA reports of other World Bank PforR operations;
   •   Preparation and publication of the draft ESSA prior to the Appraisal mission on the World Bank's
       external website;
   •   A consultation of the draft ESSA with focus groups such as government representatives and
       relevant civil society stakeholders to be conducted prior to the Assessment.
   •   The preparation and publication of the final version of the ESSA report, taking into account the key
       comments gathered in the consultation.




                                                                                                          9


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
2. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

2.1.Government Program

The National Land Administration Authority (ANATI), created by Law No. 59 of October 8, 2010, is the
State's governing body for the administration, regulation, titling, and cadastral management of Panama.
Among its legal functions, it is assigned the exclusive competence to develop, implement and administer
the multipurpose cadastre system, a strategic tool that allows consolidating georeferenced and updated
physical, legal and economic information on the land. This system constitutes a strategic tool for territorial
planning, legal security in land tenure and fiscal efficiency, contributing directly to the social and economic
well-being of the country.

To implement this system, intra- and intersectoral coordination is required with key actors, such as the
Public Registry, the General Directorate of Revenue (DGI), municipalities and other State institutions, as
well as the integration of modern technologies. This effort not only guarantees institutional interoperability,
but also allows offering quality public services to users, who seek to preserve their real estate assets and
ensure their legal and economic stability.

ANATI, in compliance with its legal functions and recognizing the technical validity of the Multifinalitarian
Cadastre as a strategic tool for territorial management, has decided to structure the National
Multifinalitarian Cadastre Program 2025–2035 as a long-term State policy. This program is conceived with
a focus on digital transformation, fiscal equity, institutional interoperability, and territorial governance, with
an estimated investment of B/. 250 million over a period of ten (10) years, financed through contributions
from the Central Government and external resources from multilateral financial institutions. The National
Multipurpose Cadastre Program 2025–2035 is established as a strategic initiative of the Government of
Panama, established in the Government Strategic Plan (PEG) 2025-2029, and will be institutionally
executed by ANATI, integrating technical and technological processes in accordance with international
standards.

The National Program comprises the following strategic components:
   • Policy and regulatory update to strengthen the cadastral function and modernize administrative
       processes.
   • Geodetic and cartographic modernization, through the updating of the geodesic network and the
       generation of base cartography according to international standards.
   • Cadastral formation, updating, and conservation processes in rural, urban, and urban expansion
       areas.
   • Establishment of interoperable national data standards, aligned with fiscal, registry, and
       environmental reporting entities.
   • Development of the Integrated Cadastre-Registry Information System (SIICAR) to link legal and
       cadastral data.
   • Regional operating model, leveraging existing infrastructure and municipal collaboration.


                                                                                                               10


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
    •    Evaluation of mixed management schemes for specialized technical services (surveys, images,
         etc.).
    •    Multipurpose use of cadastral information to support tax policy, titling, climate resilience, urban
         planning, and environmental management.

2.2.Program-for-Results (PforR)

The Transforming the Cadastre Program for Panama will support the National Multipurpose Cadastre
Program 2025-2035, whose purpose is to develop and implement a single, digital, dynamic, interoperable
and multipurpose cadastre system, applicable throughout the national territory, and that addresses fiscal,
legal, social, environmental, land use and public planning uses.

2.2.1.   Program Development Objectives (PDOs)

The program's development objective is to develop a multipurpose national cadastre management system
and improve access to cadastre and land tenure services in selected areas of the program.

2.2.2.   Scope and geographic coverage of the multi-purpose cadastre.

The Program-for-Results (PforR) is national in scope, with geographic coverage determined by the selection
of priority areas at the municipal level.

2.2.3.   Results Areas and Main Activities

To achieve the PDO, the PforR focuses on two outcome areas (RAs), described below:

    •    Develop the National Multipurpose Cadastre Management System. It aims to address outdated
         national mapping and move to a multi-purpose system. This will be achieved by scaling up practices
         and technologies aligned with the LADM (Land Administration Domain Model - ISO 19152:2012)
         standard. This RA includes: geodetic and cartographic support to support (i) regulatory reforms
         related to cadastral and cartographic standards: (ii) the modernization of geodetic, cartographic and
         computer equipment; and (iii) acquisition of high-resolution images using aerial and satellite
         sources. Also, capacity building and ICT to facilitate (i) digitization of cadastral information, (ii)
         hiring of qualified personnel, (iii) development of a comprehensive business plan for ANATI, and
         (iv) design and implementation of accessible training courses for land professionals, Indigenous
         communities, women, and municipal authorities.

    •    Improve access to cadastre and land tenure services in selected areas of the Program. It aims to
         address the lack of interconnectivity between databases that use and provide land-related
         information and to improve the efficiency and reliability of territorial information services by
         contributing to a more transparent, accessible, and responsive territorial governance system. This
         RA includes: cadastre and land titles to support: (i) systematic cadastre surveys and diagnostics to

                                                                                                            11


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
         evaluate land tenure rights, including technological equipment, systems audits, and technical
         assistance aimed at the development of SIICAR. In addition, improvement of procedures to
         manage: (i) awareness and communication campaigns at the municipal and community levels, (ii)
         permanent platform for consultation on the cadastre, and (iii) guidelines on gender equity,
         indigenous land claims and conflict resolution to carry out systematic cadastre surveys and
         diagnoses of land tenure rights.

2.2.4.   Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs)

The PforR results framework targets the following disbursement-linked indicators:

         Results Area 1

         o   Continuously Operating Reference Stations (CORS) with up-to-date technology, operational
             and connected to the Network Control Center (CCR)
         o   Updated national cartography with ortho images and digital terrain models according to the
             new mapping standards adopted.
         o   Panama LADM Model Formally Adopted
         o   ANATI business plan adopted

         Results Area 2

         o   Existing and updated cadastral information under the new LADM-Panama model integrated
             into SIICAR
         o   Prioritized municipalities with at least 50% of their surface area with updated cadastral and
             registry information integrated into SIICAR – Central System.

2.2.5.   Selection of pilots for activities related to collective land titling and the Information System
         for Indigenous Territories

In conjunction with ANATI, a proposal has been developed for criteria for the selection of indigenous
territories that will be considered for the implementation of Project activities. The Program-for-Results will
finance two complementary pilot lines: (1) collective land titling and (2) the design and initial
implementation of a territorial information system for indigenous areas.

Regarding collective titling, ANATI currently has twenty-five (25) applications in process, with
differentiated progress. To select territories for the pilot, agreed criteria will be applied, including: (i)
regulatory compliance, which requires submission of the formal application by the competent indigenous
authority, official certification of the community's census/population data, and certification from the
Ministry of the Interior confirming the community's existence and recognition of its authority; (ii) technical
compliance, which requires complete and reliable technical information on data collection, analysis of
historical and current occupation, evaluation of overlaps with other rights or designations (for example,
private titles or protected areas) and a cadastral assessment; (iii) social compliance, which requires
documentation of processes of prior and meaningful participation with the community and authorities,
                                                                                                           12


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
identification of potential conflicts that the Program could exacerbate, and description of existing dispute
resolution mechanisms (including identification, dialogue, and mediation); and (iv) government
prioritization, focused on areas aligned with the Government's strategy and with preference for those with
low levels of conflict. In addition, ANATI will carry out an evaluation of the files associated with each
application for recognition to characterize its status and thus facilitate the application of the selection criteria
that are agreed upon.

With regard to the information system, financing will be provided for the design of a geographic information
system and a pilot for the collection of information to strengthen territorial management in indigenous areas
(planning, strengthening of governance, territorial security, management of public investments, access to
resources, etc.). The selection of the pilot will take into account ANATI's institutional priorities, as well as
the willingness of communities and traditional authorities to participate in and support this activity,
employing a methodology designed by and for indigenous authorities and communities, and which
recognizes customary rules and collective rights.

2.3. Institutional Arrangements for the Implementation of the PforR

2.3.1.   Executing Agency

ANATI will be the sole executing agency of this PforR, assuming the leadership and full responsibility for
the technical and operational coordination of the implementation of the Program. The strategic coordination
will be facilitated through the National Land Council (CNT), which is a political and administrative body
within ANATI that is already established and will function as the Program's Executive Board. The CNT is
made up of the Minister of Housing and Land Planning, the Minister of Economy and Finance, the Minister
of Agricultural Development, the Minister of Government, the General Administrator of the Panama
Tourism Authority, the Minister of the Environment, the Comptroller General of the Republic, the Director
General of the Public Registry, and the General Administrator of ANATI. Collaboration with selected
municipalities to implement the Program will be formalized through Memoranda of Understanding
(MOUs), which will clearly define parameters for cooperation as well as monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms. ANATI will hire an independent verification agency to assess compliance with the findings.

ANATI does not currently have an environmental directorate or unit or its equivalent that ensures
compliance with the requirements identified in the ESSA, including occupational health and safety and
environmental risk management. In the social sphere, ANATI articulates a set of administrative units that
perform essential functions to ensure social aspects, among which are: National Directorate of Indigenous
Lands in charge of responding to requests from indigenous peoples for collective titles, Office of Equal
Opportunities responsible for mainstreaming the gender approach and inclusion of people with disabilities
in the provision of services, the User Service Centre (CAU) responsible for managing the different means
and channels for consultation, complaints and claims from users.




                                                                                                                 13


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
2.3.2.   Other involved entities relevant to E&S management

    •    Ministry of the Environment (MiAmbiente). The national authority responsible for environmental
         protection, conservation, and the sustainable use of natural resources. MiAmbiente will play an
         essential role in the development of the Program by providing, validating, and regulating
         environmental information related to protected areas, forests, water bodies, wetlands, and other
         environmentally sensitive areas, as well as by defining land‑use restrictions for cadastral updating
         and mass titling processes.. In coordination with ANATI, its national and regional directorates will
         evaluate the environmental compliance of properties applying for titling, issue favorable concepts
         when appropriate, and determine cases where titling is not appropriate.

    •    Ministry of Culture (MiCultura): The governing authority for national cultural heritage, responsible
         for the administration and protection of the country’s historical, archaeological, and architectural
         assets. MiCultura will play a relevant role in the Program by providing official information on
         cultural zones and assets, defining land‑use restrictions for properties with registered or potential
         cultural heritage, and coordinating with ANATI to prevent titling processes that could adversely
         affect such assets. This coordination will contribute to the conservation of national heritage that
         may be present on properties applying for land titles..

    •    National Civil Protection System (SINAPROC): The entity responsible for identifying and
         managing disaster risks, issuing preventive guidelines, and coordinating emergency response.
         SINAPROC will play a fundamental role in the Program by providing official information on
         natural hazards, such as floods, landslides, and earthquakes, necessary for integrating risk criteria
         into the multipurpose cadastre.

    •    In aspects of Occupational Health and Safety (OHS), the Ministry of Labor and Labor Development
         (MITRADEL) is the governing body in OHS, responsible for supervising compliance with the
         Labor Code and the OHS Regulations, carrying out inspections, and ensuring that OHS committees
         exist and function in public institutions. The Social Security Fund (CSS), through its Directorate of
         Occupational Health and Safety, complements these functions through the prevention of
         occupational risks, training, technical guides, and the registration and treatment of accidents or
         occupational diseases. For its part, the Ministry of Health (MINSA), as the health authority,
         regulates hygiene and health conditions in workplaces and can intervene in aspects of biosecurity,
         ventilation, sanitation, and conditions of the infrastructure that ANATI remodels. Together, these
         entities provide the institutional framework needed to ensure that Program activities meet
         occupational health, safety, and well-being standards.

    •    Municipalities. Panama's municipalities have key competencies in the control of minor civil works,
         solid waste management and local land management. They can establish basic safety requirements
         for public spaces, supervise works within their jurisdiction, and apply penalties for non-compliance.
         Its role will be relevant within the framework of the Program to contribute to ensuring adequate
         environmental management of the works to adapt existing ANATI infrastructure, and also to

                                                                                                           14


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
    collaborate with the latter to modernize the cadastre, update the information on public assets, green
    areas, municipal settlements, zoning, among others.

•   Ministry of Government. Member of the National Land Council, ANATI's governing body. It is the
    ministry responsible for determining government policies and planning, coordinating, directing and
    executing administrative control of the indigenous provinces and comarcas. The Vice Ministry of
    Indigenous Affairs is responsible for planning, directing and coordinating the country's indigenous
    policy.

•   The National Commission on Political-Administrative Boundaries provides advice on boundary
    matters, providing the required studies, applying alternative mechanisms of operation in accordance
    with the methods of resolving conflicts that arise between provinces, districts, townships and these
    with indigenous regions and between them. It is chaired by the MINGOB and the IGNTG
    participates, which acts as the seat of the commission.




                                                                                                      15


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
3. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASPECTS OF THE PforR

3.1. PforR Activities Associated with Potential Environmental, Social, Health and Safety Risks

The Program plans to support the modernization of the cadastre and the integration of geospatial data into
the Integrated Cadastre and Registry Information System (SICAR), which can influence, among others,
better territorial planning, better management of potential social conflicts, conservation of sensitive areas,
and prevention of environmental conflicts. by providing a more accurate and up-to-date basis for decision-
making.

As part of the interventions defined in RAs 1 and 2 of the PforR Program, the PforR Program could include
the following activities relevant for the evaluation of environmental and occupational health (OHS) risk,
which will be evaluated in greater detail: (i) acquisition and installation of modern geodetic, cartographic
and computer equipment necessary for cadastral processes, both at the central and regional levels; (ii)
adaptation, with minor reforms to the interior of the existing physical infrastructure in ANATI's regional
offices, at the main headquarters and in the Tommy Guardia National Geographic Institute (IGNTG); (iii)
the installation of continuous operation reference stations (CORS), which may require the identification of
areas for their installation and small concrete columns with a perimeter fence. These structures are expected
to be small in size and scale, and located in both urban and rural areas, and may coincide with natural
habitats; and (iv) titling of individual tenure rights that may overlap with forests and other environmentally
sensitive areas.

On the social side, relevant activities for the assessment of social risks include: (i) cadastre surveys and
diagnostics to assess land tenure rights; (ii) development of SICAR and the Geographic Information System
for the management of indigenous territories, (iii) implementation of accessible training courses for women,
indigenous communities and municipal authorities; (iv) awareness and communication campaigns at the
municipal and community level; (v) permanent platform for consultation on the cadastre; (vi) guidelines on
gender equity, indigenous land claims, and conflict resolution for conducting the cadastre and land tenure
surveys. These activities as a whole require: consultation and participation of the key actors, communication
and transparency of information; as well as standardization of processes with cultural and gender
adaptations and a tenure dispute resolution approach (conflicts) to avoid, minimize or mitigate adverse
effects. The existing consultation, grievance, and grievance mechanisms; as well as the identification of
tenure disputes and mediation need to be strengthened.

3.2. List of activities excluded from PforR

The PforR Policy (paragraph 10) states that activities likely to have significant adverse environmental or
social impacts are not eligible for financing under this instrument. According to the findings of the ESSA
at the Program Evaluation stage, no impacts of such magnitude associated with the proposed activities are
expected. The exclusion list is presented below, which identifies activities that cannot be financed by the
PforR due to the significant risks and adverse impacts that they could generate on the environment and/or
the population. This exclusion list should be operationalized and formally incorporated into the Program
Operational Manual (POM), which is a requirement for effectiveness. This list will include, but is not
limited to:
                                                                                                           16


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
     •    Activities that have the potential to cause loss, fragmentation, deforestation, or significant
          degradation of natural and critical habitats, either directly or indirectly, or that may result in adverse
          impacts on these habitats, including Natural Protected Areas (NPAs), urban or rural wetlands,
          mangroves, and other sensitive ecosystems.
     •    Titling of individual or overlapping tenure rights to PNAs, including their buffer zones, and to
          mangroves. Municipal PNAs are also included. It is worth emphasizing that this exclusion is due
          to national regulations, Law 41 of 1998 - General Law on the Environment2 and Law 80 of 2009 3-
          Law on Titling in Coastal and Insular Zones.
     •    Titling of individual tenure rights where the existence of a social function cannot be corroborated.
          It is worth emphasizing that this exclusion is due to Law 24 of 2006, which declares the activities
          of regulation and mass titling of lands carried out by the State to be of public order and social
          interest.
     •    Titling of individual or collective tenure rights that overlap wetlands.
     •    Violation of the protection of an NPA by titling of overlapping properties.
     •    Violation of the protection of a cultural heritage site by titling overlapping properties.
     •    Any construction in protected areas or priority areas for the conservation of biodiversity that lead
          to their affectation.
     •    Construction in areas of high risk due to natural hazards (floods, landslides, earthquakes, tsunamis,
          fires).
     •    Land titling processes that result in significant deforestation of forests.
     •    Land titling processes that could increase social tensions or conflicts and/or result in involuntary
          relocation (physical and economic), through: land purchases, alienation from land, or restrictions
          placed on access to and use of land and natural resources that are the basis of peoples' livelihoods.
     •    Large-scale forest products processing or commercial logging operations.
     •    Purchase and/or use of chemicals banned/restricted by national regulations and competent
          international entities.
     •    Activities affecting physical cultural heritage such as graves, temples, churches, historical relics,
          archeological sites, or other cultural structures
     •    Activities that, because of their magnitude and scale, require an Environmental Impact Study (EIA),
          according to Panama's Environmental Impact Assessment System.
     •    Activities that cause significant pollution to air, water, or land that are likely to have significant
          adverse impacts on the health or safety of people, communities, or ecosystems.
     •    Activities that generate substantial adverse impacts on indigenous peoples and require physical or
          economic resettlement, including displacement of communities or loss of livelihood through land
          acquisition, restrictions of access, or disruption of essential resources (forests, water, sacred sites).
          This includes alteration of own governance, customary tenure, tangible and intangible cultural
          heritage.


2 The General Law on the Environment. This law creates SINAP and establishes that protected areas are public property of the

State, regulated by MiAMBIENTE, which implies that they cannot be titled privately.
3 The Law on Titling in Coastal and Insular Zones regulates titling in coastal and insular zones, but Article 10 explicitly excludes

mangroves, protected areas, and other territories subject to restriction of private appropriation from titling processes.

                                                                                                                                17


                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
    •   Activities with working conditions that expose workers to significant risks to personal health and
        safety.
    •   Activities that may cause or lead to forced labor or child abuse, child labor exploitation or human
        trafficking, or that employ or involve children under the age of 18, in connection with the Program.
    •   Activities that cause physical and/or economic displacement of the population.
    •   Activities that directly or indirectly violate the rights of Afro-descendant communities, including
        affecting their tenure, use and traditional management of the territory; discrimination or exclusion
        in participation, consultation or access to information; and the implementation of actions without
        adequate cultural, linguistic and gender safeguards.

3.3. PforR Environmental and Social Risk Analysis

Based on the information available at the Program Evaluation stage, none of the Program activities are
included in the previously presented exclusion list.

The Program is not expected to generate significant adverse environmental impacts on sensitive or critical
habitats, diverse, or unprecedented on the environment and/or affected people. However, the preliminary
environmental and social risk assessment for the Program indicates a Substantial Environmental Risk
Rating, which is subject to review during preparation of the Program. On environmental matters, planned
activities (described in section 3.1) could generate small-scale, temporary site-specific direct impacts, such
as dust, noise, vibrations, inadequate generation and handling of waste (including waste electrical and
electronic equipment -WEEE), as well as manageable worker health and safety risks through easy-to-
implement prevention and mitigation measures. However, although the Program will not finance titling in
protected areas, mangroves or wetlands, titling may occur in forested areas and areas with bodies of water
or cultural heritage, so additional analysis is required to avoid significant indirect risks, especially related
to forest conversion. In addition, ANATI lacks a unit or staff with the technical capacity and resources to
manage and supervise the environmental risks of the Program, and the competent environmental authorities
do not have sufficient resources and personnel to guarantee the control and protection of natural habitats
and habitats of interest for biodiversity on lands benefiting from the titling.

On the social side, the risk classification is also considered Substantial due to the sensitive nature of the
planned activities and the need to strengthen existing mechanisms for participation, information,
complaints, and dispute resolution. The main social risks include the possibility of conflicts over land rights
and tenure, especially in territories with an indigenous population and areas with overlapping claims; risks
of exclusion of vulnerable groups as subjects of rights or holders in titling processes, including the elderly,
persons with disabilities, women and indigenous peoples, due to access, cultural or linguistic barriers; and
limited participation and information processes due to lack of adaptation and use of accessible means. There
may also be complaints about long response times to complete cadastral and titling procedures, as well as
limited institutional capacities to manage disputes, prevent their escalation into judicial conflicts and ensure
that their resolution is registered and effectively monitored. Finally, there are risks of disinformation or
community resistance to cadastral surveys and communication campaigns if culturally relevant
transparency, consultation, and mediation strategies are not implemented.



                                                                                                             18


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
Based on the above information, the PforR's social and environmental risk classification is generally
considered Substantial. The results of the Program's environmental and social benefits and impact analysis
are explained in detail below.

3.4. Expected environmental benefits

Based on the preliminary findings of this draft ESSA, the development of the multipurpose cadastre in
Panama can generate significant environmental benefits, in line with the activities of Outcome Areas 1 and
2 of the PforR. By having accurate data on property boundaries, current land use, and protected areas,
authorities can better control urban sprawl, avoid settlements in ecologically sensitive areas, and reduce
pressure on forests and watersheds. The integrated geospatial information system can also facilitate
deforestation monitoring, the conservation of key ecosystems for carbon sequestration, such as forests,
mangroves, and wetlands, contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation, and the identification
of areas vulnerable to floods or landslides, thus contributing to more resilient territorial planning and more
effective disaster risk management. The new cadastre system can also generate energy benefits through the
modernization of more efficient technological equipment, adaptation of infrastructure to more efficient
standards, the digitalization of processes, and improved land use planning. In addition, as part of the
implementation of the actions recommended by the PforR in its Action Plan for the strengthening of ANATI
in the environmental and OHS management and supervision of Program activities, it is expected that the
Program's performance in these areas will also be strengthened.

3.5. Potential Adverse Environmental and Health Safety Effects

As of the date of this draft ESSA, no significant adverse environmental and OHS impacts are expected as
a result of the PforR. However, some of the activities supported by the Program could have negative
environmental effects, particularly those related to the installation and handling of technological equipment,
the adaptation of existing infrastructure, titling of individual land rights in areas of the national forest
heritage, such as natural forests, and those associated with the safety and health of the workers involved in
the implementation and operation of these activities. The identified potential direct, indirect environmental
and OHS impacts are presented below:

Direct environmental risks and potential impacts:

    •   Nuisance related to the generation of dust, vibration and noise during the internal works of
        adaptation of existing infrastructure and installation of technological equipment, and during the
        installation of CORS stations. The works will be carried out inside the ANATI offices (regional and
        central and at the IGNTG) and will not require the processing of municipal or environmental permits
        from competent environmental authorities. They include aspects such as: roof arrangements, wall
        painting, furniture installation, small masonry jobs, electricity, among others. These works would be
        carried out by ANATI personnel with experience in this type of work, without the need for tenders. The
        same applies to the installation of CORS stations. However, ANATI does not have a formal documented
        procedure to manage the potential environmental effects generated during these activities. Regarding
        the installation of CORS stations, in some very specific cases, ANATI may require outsourcing of this


                                                                                                           19


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
          service (e.g., when it involves the implementation of a cement monolith). In these cases, ANATI does
          not have environmental management procedures to include in such contracts.

     •    Physical intervention in the territory for the collection of cadastral information, which may
          include the clearing of trails, roads, or access points in rural areas to reach remote properties,
          causing damage to the associated vegetation and fauna, or disturbing the soil if the accesses are not
          properly planned. However, this risk is considered insignificant, since it usually occurs in pasture areas,
          the trails or paths to be cleaned do not usually exceed 2 or 3 meters in width, and those who carry out
          this activity are usually the beneficiaries themselves.

     •    Inadequate generation, management, and disposal of solid waste (hazardous and non-hazardous)
          during infrastructure adaptation works and installation of technological equipment (e.g. CORS
          stations, drones, GPS equipment, mobile stations, high-tech servers, etc.), including containers with
          paint residues, oils, among others.

     •    Inadequate WEEE generation, management, and disposal. When the equipment to be financed
          reaches its useful life, and/or when obsolete equipment is replaced, ANATI must manage this waste in
          accordance with the "Manual of general standards and procedures for the administration and control of
          heritage assets in the public sector" approved by Decree No. 32-2017-DMySC. However, this manual
          does not apply to the electrical waste of these appliances generated during their installation or operation,
          such as cables, batteries, and plugs, among others. As they do not receive differentiated management,
          they can end up mixed with ordinary waste in municipal landfills.

Indirect environmental risks and potential impacts:

     •    Deforestation, land use changes, or agricultural/urban expansion on natural habitats, in
          anticipation of titling: the cadastre and titling of individual properties require the corroboration
          of a social function (use of the land).4 If there is no social function, the property is not titled. In this
          case, there is a risk of deforestation, land use change and/or agricultural/urban expansion on natural
          habitats to justify a social function prior to titling. Although it is true that during the cadastre and titling
          process, ANATI uses different means to corroborate the social use of the properties for a period of at
          least 5 years as a requirement for titling (such as consultation with adjoining properties, review of
          certifications of local authorities, verification of the 2021 coverage map, etc.), these methods are neither
          standardized nor properly regulated.

     •    Titling of land with forested areas may provide incentives for deforestation within such areas.
          Resolution 0391/2008 of the National Environment Authority establishes the criteria for granting a
          Favorable Concept as part of land titling processes within the framework of the National Land
          Administration Program (currently ANATI). The following criterion applies to applications for the
          allocation of land belonging to the State Forest Heritage located in rural areas:



4 Article 12 of Law No. 1 of 1994 declares the State's Forest Heritage inalienable, making it possible to exclude from this declaration

those State lands with preferably forestry aptitude on which agricultural activities or others are being carried out for the well-being
of the population.

                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
              o    For plots of land smaller than or equal to 1 hectare (ha) with forested areas: by national
                   regulations, in these cases, no particular requirement applies. However, ANATI affirms that in
                   general all properties smaller than 1 hectare currently do not have forest cover. Based on the
                   country's socioeconomic characteristics and dynamics, properties of 1 hectare or less are
                   usually made up of residential areas and areas for work or social use. Properties in this area do
                   not usually have forest cover.
              o    For properties larger than 1 ha and less than or equal to 5 ha with less than 60% forest cover: a
                   favorable concept from MiAmbiente is required. As part of the procedure to request a favorable
                   concept, a technical supervisor of MiAmbiente must visit the property and fill out the Field
                   Technical Inspection Report, in accordance with the form presented in Annex 2 of this
                   document. Titles with these characteristics have liens that indicate the existence of forested
                   areas that cannot be deforested. However, in these cases, the applicant for the titling is not
                   required to present or implement a "Plan for the Use and Management of the Land to be Titled"
                   (PUMTT), according to the last form presented in Annex 2 of this document, nor is it provided
                   with extension or awareness services on how to conserve said areas. Furthermore, the capacity
                   of the environmental authority to carry out monitoring, control, and supervision of these forests
                   is limited, mainly due to a lack of capacity and resources.
              o    Properties larger than 1 hectare and under 5 hectares with over 60 percent forest cover, or plots
                   larger than 5 hectares: they require a favorable concept from MiAmbiente and a PUMTT. These
                   plans are a fairly simple, single-sheet form for all properties, which is completed by the
                   petitioner for the property, in which he only has to indicate the use and management that he
                   will give to the land, including the hectares that he will dedicate to that use, and the measures
                   for the protection of natural resources. of the forest and the existing biodiversity to be
                   implemented5. Furthermore, as noted in the previous paragraph, the beneficiary is not provided
                   with extension services or awareness raising on how to conserve these areas, and the capacity
                   of the environmental authority to carry out monitoring, control, and supervision of these forests
                   is limited.

Cumulative, long-term impacts:

Deforestation processes, land use changes, or agricultural/urban expansion on natural habitats, in anticipation of
titling and/or as a result of it, could have a cumulative effect in terms of biodiversity loss and soil degradation
when considering historical deforestation processes in the intervention areas. El MiAmbiente, in its Diagnosis
of Forests and Other Wooded Lands 2023 (released in 2024), it reports significant losses of forest cover at the
national level, linked to deforestation processes and transformation of the territory. Along the same lines, a
technical report prepared for UN-REDD+/UNEP Regarding the direct and indirect causes of deforestation in
Panama, it identifies agricultural expansion as relevant causes, together with underlying factors such as land use
planning, infrastructure, and institutional weaknesses, which together sustain forest loss over time. In this
context, the PforR could generate indirect cumulative impacts if titling and cadastral updating are implemented
without adequate environmental management in areas where there are already pressures for land use change.



5
 The environmental information on which the PUMTT is based is very limited, since there is no legal requirement to carry out a
more detailed analysis of the ecological value and biodiversity of the natural forest on these properties

                                                                                                                           21


                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
Health and Safety Risks:

    •   Occupational health and safety:
           o Physical hazards related to light construction and field work, including falls, impacts, load
               handling, minor excavations, and the use of tools.
           o Electrical hazards during the installation of technological equipment, such as discharges, short
               circuits, minor fires, and accidents associated with wiring and equipment configuration.
           o Ergonomics and long-term exposure hazards, especially during continuous computer use,
               mapping and office or field work.
           o Environmental exposure risks, including extreme heat, humidity, heavy rainfall, and contact
               with wildlife when working in rural or forested areas, particularly during cadastral sweeping
               activities.
           o Risk of road accidents due to personnel traveling to regional sites and to remote areas for field
               information collection.

    •   Community health and safety risk (beneficiaries)
           o Titling of land in areas with latent risk of floods or landslides. Although it is true that ANATI
             consults SINAPROC on cases of properties in areas vulnerable to disaster risks such as floods
             or landslides, this process has not been duly stipulated or standardized, and to date it is left to
             the discretion of the surveyors and other personnel hired to carry out the cadastral sweeps.
             Furthermore, to date, SINAPROC does not have maps of disaster risk areas with the scale
             necessary for land-level analyses.

3.6. Expected social benefits

The activities foreseen by the PforR in its two results areas can generate significant social benefits for
Panama. (i) the updating of cadastral and registry information integrated into SICAR will improve the basis
for the formulation of public policies, territorial planning, and provision of public services at the national
level; (ii) cadastral surveys and assessment of tenure rights will improve legal security and equity in access
to land, with an emphasis on the inclusion of women and people with disabilities; (iii) access to SICAR by
the regional offices of ANATI and the municipalities and the information system for indigenous territories
will strengthen regional, municipal, and indigenous territories capacities to improve territorial
administration; (iv) standardization of processes, considering SIICAR operational, and incorporation of
adaptation guidelines with an inclusive approach will improve the quality and response times of procedures
and reduce transaction costs; (v) the communication campaigns and the consultation platform will increase
transparency and access to cadastral information, generating greater certainty about the status of procedures
and the quality of the information as part of the strengthening of rights; (vi) training on the cadastral
information system with an inclusive approach (gender and ethnicity) will expand opportunities for women
and the indigenous population and boost the economy through the generation of quality jobs and territorial
development.




                                                                                                             22


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
3.7. Possible adverse social effects

Although no significant adverse social impacts are expected from the PforR, the assessment identifies social
risks that could affect the achievement of Program outcomes. These include: (i) verification and updating
of property boundaries and rights during the cadastral survey in the field can reactivate latent conflicts
between communities or individuals (already existing disputes over tenure, use, and delimitation), even if
they do not necessarily exacerbate them; (ii) exclusion of vulnerable groups (women, indigenous peoples,
and persons with disabilities) as subjects of rights in the cadastre survey or as owners in the cadastre
processes (iii) limitations in participation and access to information due to lack of accessible and culturally
adapted mechanisms, (iv) delays in the resolution of procedures that can generate complaints and social
tensions. In addition, (v) there is limited institutional capacity to handle complaints and mediate conflicts,
which increases the risk of escalation into judicial processes and undermines confidence in the Program.
Finally, (vi) there is a risk of misinformation or community resistance to cadastral surveys and
communication campaigns if transparency, consultation, and culturally pertinent mediation strategies are
not implemented, considering that the process includes stages for communication of activities and
dissemination of results.

Potential Social Risks and Impacts:

    •   Conflicts due to disputes over land tenure rights. The land regularization and mass titling process
        (Annex 3), currently consisting of twelve stages (A1 to A12), identifies two potential moments in
        which conflicts may potentially arise when possession is disputed: (i) cadastral survey (A4) and (ii)
        publicity and summons (A10 - step prior to mass award). The procedure identifies preparedness,
        disclosure, and notification actions (A1 – A3) where detailed information is provided on the
        objective and activities of the process, including actions to avoid and minimize conflicts that limit
        the continuity of the process for the disputed property or properties. ANATI offers, at the request
        of a party, the mediation alternative (Annex 4) as an instance prior to the administration of justice
        (Court) and in such a case, if the conflict continues, a secretarial report is drawn up (Annex 5) and
        the ruling (Annex 6) is drawn up as the basis for sending the file to the administration of justice.
        ANATI has a system of forms and documents that must be applied as part of the execution of the
        process. The number of cases that reach mediation or the administration of justice can be verified
        through manual review; However, there is no standardized recording and monitoring mechanism.
        In the pilots of collective titling and the territorial information system, there are additional social
        risks: (i) selection of territories without due consultation or validation by traditional authorities,
        which can exacerbate latent or inter-community conflicts; (ii) insufficient verification of overlaps
        with pre-existing rights (e.g., protected areas, private titles), with the potential to aggravate
        disputes; (iii) prioritization processes that favor "low conflict" areas without explicit measures so
        as not to discriminate against communities with greater barriers, reproducing inequities; and (iv)
        data-gathering methodologies that do not incorporate customary rules and collective rights, which
        can erode trust, affect the quality of data, and reduce the sustainability of results.




                                                                                                            23


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
•   Exclusion of vulnerable groups (women, indigenous peoples, and persons with disabilities) as
    subjects of formal and informal law in cadastre surveys or as owners in titling processes.
    There is a significant risk of exclusion of vulnerable groups from the Program's activities, both in
    the cadastral survey and in the titling processes, which could limit their recognition as subjects of
    rights, affect their access to information and consultation, and generate biases in official records
    and statistics. This risk is expressed in: (i) tools and instruments that do not adequately capture the
    diversity of owners (for example, forms with a single "main owner" that make co-ownership, de
    facto unions, and community arrangements invisible); (ii) absence of operational guides/protocols
    guiding field staff to prevent exclusion; and (iii) gaps in the collection of key data (sex, ethnicity,
    disability, age, language) that prevent the design of equitable accessibility measures, culturally
    pertinent approaches, and notification flows. If not mitigated, these failures can result in:
    unrecognized or unequal ownership; patrimonial decisions without the consent of all the owners;
    Less likely to receive notifications; and poorly targeted public policies that perpetuate inequalities.

            Gender: Panama has gender gaps in home and farm ownership, and a significant
            percentage of farms lack formal title. The current cadastral record (Annex 7) allows only
            one "principal owner" to be entered, relegating the other persons as "additional owners,"
            which de facto deprioritizes rights in co-ownership and de facto unions. This makes it
            difficult for them to be recognized by authorities and third parties for procedures,
            patrimonial decisions, inheritances or compensations, and skews official statistics by not
            reflecting joint ownership. The absence of a gender-sensitive survey guide/protocol
            aggravates the risk, as staff may not identify, document, or verify the consent of all
            incumbents. Taken together, this may result in: lack of guarantee of joint ownership on
            equal terms; decisions without the express consent of all the owners; and flows of
            information and notification that address only the "primary owner".

            Indigenous Peoples: In the case of indigenous peoples, the risk of exclusion is evident
            both inside and outside indigenous territories. More than half of the indigenous population
            resides outside these territories, but current instruments do not include a specific field for
            documenting ethnicity or for verifying linguistic barriers between Spanish and mother
            tongue. This hinders the design of culturally relevant survey, titling, and communication
            processes (language, facilitators, materials) and may limit the effective participation of
            authorities and representative organizations in tenure decisions. The non-identification of
            ethnicity, language use, and social organization in the cadastral file and information
            systems can make indigenous peoples invisible in registries and statistics, hinder the design
            of culturally relevant processes (language, facilitators, appropriate materials), limit their
            effective participation in tenure decisions, and, ultimately, to reproduce inequities in titling
            and territorial management.

            Other vulnerable groups (persons with disabilities, older persons, and others): Persons
            with disabilities, older persons, and other groups with specific needs face exclusion risks
            amplified by gaps in data capture and use, as well as physical, communicational, and

                                                                                                         24


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
            procedural accessibility barriers. The cadastral file does not incorporate a structured field
            to identify disability or accessibility needs, which today is only recorded as an observation
            and makes it difficult to trace it for the design of reasonable accommodations (for example,
            accessible formats, sign language interpreters, accompaniment for signatures or powers of
            attorney, or home visits). The absence of a survey protocol that guides field teams on the
            early identification of these needs and on the systematic recording of key variables
            (disability, age, dependency, guardianship/care) increases the risk of: (i) underreporting
            and, therefore, statistical invisibility; (ii) notifications and inquiries that do not arrive or
            are not understandable; (iii) exclusion from ownership due to lack of support for the
            expression of will or for the granting of informed consent; and (iv) higher costs and time
            for these groups due to the lack of accessible itineraries. In pilots, if universal accessibility
            measures and reasonable accommodations are not planned, including accessible signage
            and materials, flexible schedules, priority attention mechanisms, personalized assistance
            channels and representation/accreditation options, the gap in access to qualifications and
            territorial services may widen. Recommending the inclusion of specific fields in the
            cadastral file and information system, as well as operational and monitoring guidelines, is
            key to ensuring effective participation and differentiated monitoring of results for these
            groups.



•   Limitations in participation and access to information due to lack of accessible and culturally
    adapted mechanisms. ANATI has procedures and technical instruments that guide the operations
    of its work teams at its main and regional headquarters, as well as in field operations; it also has
    official mechanisms for consultations, complaints, and denunciations, in face-to-face format
    (service posts) and digitally (line 311, institutional emails, social networks). Notwithstanding, the
    inquiries that are received, mainly, they respond to requests for information for procedures initiated
    or for service requirements; At the same time, a high level of participation of municipal actors and
    indigenous authorities is reported, who act as liaisons in the flow of information to the communities.
    Similarly, in the field operations, activities are carried out to present, disseminate and publish
    information at the level of the general public and individuals, which requires the preparation of
    technical and legal messages at the level of general understanding, taking into account the diversity
    of the population. When asked about the existence of adapted and standardized materials, it was
    not possible to verify it and it is reported that some come from the staff's own elaboration. This risk
    also has repercussions on actors such as municipalities, since they need up-to-date and timely
    cadastral and tenure information in order to plan land use, organize the territory, prioritize public
    investments, manage services, and exercise oversight functions. The lack of mechanisms for timely
    access and interoperable formats limits their ability to: (i) identify and address settlements and
    infrastructure needs; (ii) coordinating planning and regularization processes with indigenous
    authorities and communities; (iii) define and collect taxes linked to the ownership or use of land
    with criteria of equity; and (iv) prevent conflicts due to overlapping rights or occupation decisions.
    The lack of culturally relevant information and adapted channels also hinders the circulation of data
    to and from municipalities and can lead to backlogs in permits, works, and services, decisions based

                                                                                                          25


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
    on incomplete information, and increased exposure to administrative and social disputes.
    Standardizing communication materials and protocols, establishing interoperable data windows or
    dashboards with local governments, and designing culturally and linguistically sensitive
    engagement and dissemination mechanisms are key to mitigate these risks.

•   Delays in resolving paperwork that may generate grievances and social tensions. ANATI
    reports that 40 percent of the area eligible for land is entitled and 72 percent is registered. Both data
    point to evidence of a significant operational gap that makes it imperative to develop a multipurpose
    national cadastre system (Annex 8). Modernization of equipment and technology, standardization
    of processes, implementation of SICAR and its interoperability, staff training, strengthening of
    consultation and participation mechanisms, as well as greater budgetary availability to carry out
    land regularization and mass titling processes and strengthen the execution of the procedure for the
    adjudication of collective ownership of lands traditionally occupied by the peoples (Annex 9),
    together form actions that contribute to a reduction in processing times for ANATI processes.
    Currently, according to ANATI's administrative records, between 4,000 and 6,000 titles are awarded
    annually through massive awards, representing 2% of titled properties (as of October 2025), and
    63% of indigenous collective property processes in process date from before 2020 and report an
    average progress of 19% (3 of 16 stages). In this context, the implementation of a cadastre and
    titling improvement project may trigger claims by indigenous peoples questioning why individual
    and massive titling continues while their applications for collective titling have remained stagnant
    since 2020, which increases the risk of social tensions, loss of trust, and potential escalation towards
    administrative and judicial controversies if clear prioritization measures are not established.
    Transparency and specific follow-up for collective files.

•   Limited institutional capacity to manage complaints and mediate conflicts. The Manual on
    Organization and Functions of ANATI includes among the functions of some of the Operational
    Directorates the promotion of Alternative Methods of Conflict Resolution, if required in the
    development of their processes; however, there is no specialized area or personnel with specific
    positions and functions in mediation and conciliation. Moreover, there are no units within ANATI
    dedicated to specifically addressing land conflicts between indigenous and non-indigenous peoples,
    which limits the institutional response in intercultural contexts and high social sensitivity. Workers
    with training in Alternative Methods of Conflict Resolution are reported in a smaller amount;
    therefore, the training area of the Office of Human Resources seeks to increase training and certify
    personnel. Strengthening capacity in conflict resolution by incorporating expertise in intercultural
    management within the units in charge of complaints and mediation, including skills to facilitate
    dialogue between traditional authorities and non-indigenous actors, culturally pertinent protocols,
    and coordination mechanisms with relevant institutions, would contribute to managing tenure
    disputes more effectively and to preventing their escalation into the administration of tenure
    disputes. justice.
•   Disinformation or community resistance to cadastral surveys and communication campaigns.
    The absence of materials and channels adapted to local contexts, languages, and literacy levels,
    added to connectivity gaps (for example, nearly 30 percent of households do not have internet

                                                                                                          26


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
        access, according to the 2023 Census) and to the linguistic and cultural diversity of the indigenous
        population, also considering that a large part resides outside the comarcas; It can lead to
        misunderstandings, rumors, and rejection of activities, affecting participation, the quality of the
        survey, and the legitimacy of the process. Mitigation requires co-design with community and
        indigenous authorities, accessible multichannel outreach (including offline formats), local
        facilitators and interpreters, independent verification of key messages, and protocols for feedback
        and early correction of information, in conjunction with ANATI's cadastral modernization efforts.

Potential cumulative social risks/impacts

Given the Program's multiple concurrent interventions, such as cadastral modernization, geospatial
integration in SICAR, infrastructure adjustments, installation of CORS, cadastral surveys, titling (including
in environmentally sensitive areas), development of the information system for indigenous territories, as
well as deployment of consultation campaigns, courses, and platforms, social impacts could accumulate if
they are not coordinated and sequenced in a focused manner inclusive.

Together, these processes could lead to: (i) reactivate or overlap tenure disputes on several fronts and
territories at once, increasing the mediation burden and the risk of judicialization; (ii) amplify gaps in access
and participation of women, indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities, and older persons if instruments,
protocols, and materials are not culturally and linguistically standardized and adapted; (iii) generate
information asymmetries between the national, municipal, and indigenous levels, affecting local planning
and public trust, especially if data are not interoperable or shared in a timely manner; (iv) increasing
exposure to disinformation and community resistance due to the simultaneity of campaigns and uprisings,
if there are no consistent messages and early feedback; and (v) putting pressure on ANATI's institutional
capacity to manage complaints and disputes, causing delays and reputational effects.

These cumulative risks may play out in areas with overlapping rights and/or high ethnic and linguistic
diversity. The paper then describes mitigation measures to address these potential cumulative risks and
impacts, such as clear sequencing, interoperability of data, differentiated protocols, inter-institutional and
local government coordination mechanisms, and a robust grievance redress and mediation system.




                                                                                                              27


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
4. ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
   APPLICABLE TO THE PforR

This chapter primarily presents a summary of the institutional framework, laws, and regulations governing
the management of environmental, health and safety, and social risks associated with the Program's
activities and identified in the previous chapter.

4.1. Key Program Implementing Agencies and Partners

     • ANATI:
According to the law that creates ANATI (Law 59 of 2010), ANATI is the sole competent authority at the
national level to regulate, administer, title, and cadaster lands throughout the national territory, private,
state, municipal, rural, or urban. Therefore, as indicated at the beginning of this document, ANATI will be
the implementing agency for the Program. The structure of ANATI is presented in Manual of Organization
and Functions of ANATI (2024). The implementation of the Program will require the coordination of
several technical and administrative directorates of ANATI, among others:
     o The National Land Council will facilitate the strategic articulation of the Program.
     o The National Directorate of Cadastral Information and Valuation will support the
         implementation of the cadastre system, including providing and validating official cadastral
         information, and ensuring the technical and geospatial integrity necessary for titling.
     o The Tommy Guardia National Geographic Institute (IGNTG), is in charge of identifying the
         ordinary high tide line to define the non-adjudicable areas, updated administrative political division
         and the location of the existing CORS, it will also be responsible for generating, updating and
         maintaining the base geospatial information, including topographic models, orthophotos, geodesic
         networks, and the installation and maintenance of CORS stations.
     o The Directorate of Massive Adjudication will be responsible for the regularization and titling
         process in priority rural areas, coordinating land surveys, field validations, attention to complaints,
         and issuance of titles, in close coordination with local governments and communities.
     o The Information Technology Office will manage the acquisition, installation and operation of the
         hardware, software and interoperability systems necessary to integrate cadastre, registry and other
         sectoral databases.
     o The Directorate of Administration and Finance (DAF), among others, is responsible for
         managing the institutional assets and ensuring that physical and operational resources are
         maintained in a safe and functional condition. Manages the purchase of technological equipment,
         furniture and other institutional assets and supervises, for example, the administration and disposal
         of electrical and electronic equipment, including the registration of inventories, determines obsolete
         items and the management of their deregistration in accordance with the applicable regulations6.
         Coordinates the maintenance of the institutional physical infrastructure, as well as improvements
         or adaptations; is directly in charge of minor works in the interior, offices or other infrastructure,


6 Decree No. 32-2017-DMySC. Approves the "Manual of General Rules and Procedures for the Administration and Control of

Patrimonial Assets in the Public Sector.

                                                                                                                   28


                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
          which do not require building permits or environmental permits, such as those expected to involve
          the Program; or, in the case of major works, the corresponding process is followed in accordance
          with the Law that regulates public procurement7, where through the digital platform
          "PanamaCompra" the activity, work or project is put out to tender and the contractor is responsible
          for obtaining the permits required by the competent authorities (municipal or sectoral), ensuring
          their processing and compliance. This Directorate is also responsible for implementing prevention
          and safety measures in the institutional headquarters and guaranteeing adequate conditions for
          workers;
     o    Regional administrations of ANATI, responsible for implementing land policies, programs, and
          projects at the regional level.
     o    National Directorate of Indigenous Lands and Municipal Property is responsible for directing,
          organizing, and conducting the special procedure for the free adjudication of collective ownership
          of lands traditionally occupied by indigenous peoples and communities. In addition, it is
          responsible for managing the transfers of national lands in favor of the Municipalities.

     • Ministry of the Environment (MiAmbiente):
It is the national authority for the protection, conservation, preservation and restoration of the environment
and the sustainable use of natural resources and for ensuring compliance with and application of laws,
regulations and the National Environment Policy. It will play a key role in the development of the Program,
providing, validating, and regulating environmental information needed for the precise delimitation of
forests, bodies of water, wetlands, and protected areas, as well as for defining land use restrictions
applicable to properties included in the cadastral updating and rural mass titling processes. As established
in Article 10 of Law 80 of December 31, 2009, mangrove areas, indigenous and regional territories,
protected areas, and any other territory subject to legal restrictions on private appropriation shall not be
subject to titles.

In coordination with ANATI, MiAmbiente, primarily through its environmental and regional directorates,
as part of the land titling process will verify that properties applying for titling are not located within areas
of the National System of Protected Areas (SINAP) and the buffer zones; assess compliance of properties
with current environmental regulations; confirm the existence of a natural water source (bordering or a
watercourse that crosses the farm, such as a river, lake, creek and other similar), by stamping the plan of
the property (or MiAmbiente's stamp of approval)8 for ANATI; issue favorable concepts9 and the land use



7 Law 22/2006 that regulates public procurement ordered by Law 153 of 2020.

8 Article 19 of Resolution ANATI-ADMG-244 of September 26, 2017, which establishes the Single Regulations for the Review,

Approval and Registration of Surveying Plans, in ANATI, establishes that all plans submitted to ANATI must have a Prior Approval
Seal from MiAmbiente, when a watercourse is presented as adjacent, such as river, lake, creek and other similar, as well as
everything related to river easements.
9 Resolution No. AG-0391-2008 establishes the criteria for granting a Favorable Concept by ANAM (now MiAmbiente), as part of

land titling processes within the framework of the National Land Administration Program (PRONAT, now ANATI). In the case of
applications for the adjudication of lands belonging to the State Forest Heritage located in areas classified as rural towns and/or
rural areas with similar conditions, within the areas of regularization of PRONAT, the following criterion will be applied: 1. For
properties with areas less than or equal to one (1) hectare, the ANAM favorable concept procedure will not be necessary; 2. For
properties with areas greater than one (1) hectare and less than or equal to five (5) hectares, which do not have more than sixty

                                                                                                                               29


                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
and management plan through an administrative resolution, in the case of applications for the adjudication
of lands belonging to the State's forest heritage; within the regularization areas; It will identify cases where
titling is not allowed and will determine the applicable environmental conditions. In addition, it has the
competence to process environmental resolutions and supervise the environmental performance of
activities, works and projects in the country. However, it is expected that none of the Program's activities
will require environmental permits from MiAmbiente, its regional directorates, or municipal environmental
management units, due to their scope.

The following are MiAmbiente aspects of relevance in the environmental management of the Program:

     o    Environmental Information Directorate (DIA): It is the body within MiAmbiente responsible
          for providing environmental geospatial data, GIS layers, and official metadata to other MiAmbiente
          directorates and government agencies that request environmental information. Generates land
          cover and land use maps for the country and reports on land cover loss at the national level. The
          most updated map is from 2021 (approved by Resolution No. 0148 of 2022) and includes 33
          categories (including types of ecosystems and land uses). In the context of the Program, this map
          will verify the social use of existing land on the properties to be titled. That is, those properties in
          which, according to this map, there was a forest in 2021 and to date there is no longer a forest, or
          do not have a social function, will not be titled. In addition, it will be used to identify forested,
          protected or environmentally sensitive areas, and support decision-making in the titling process,
          helping to ensure that the adjudications and cadastral surveys respect the environmental restrictions
          and regulatory limits in force. The EIA also generates diagnostics every two years of coverage
          including three categories (forest, non-forested lands and water areas), the last one was published
          in 2023. These diagnostics provide geospatial information on the location and extent of forests
          throughout the Panamanian territory and provide a more up-to-date diagnostic of the type of cover
          present in the country. The DIA publishes the Land cover and land use maps and diagnostics in the
          National Environmental Information System (SINIA). The EIA will support to ANATI by
          facilitating in a timely manner the environmental geospatial information on the properties
          requesting titling and guarantee ANATI the compatibility and interoperability of the official
          geospatial layers on protected areas, forests, wetlands, mangroves and bodies of water.

     o    Forestry Directorate (DF): The agency responsible for administering the national forest heritage,
          including natural forests, state forest lands, and plantations established with State participation. Its
          functions include issuing logging and harvesting permits, as well as carrying out inspections and
          monitoring illegal deforestation activities. Within the framework of the Program, ANATI must
          coordinate with the Regional Directorates of MiAmbiente to verify compliance with the
          environmental criteria established in Resolution AG-0391-2008, applicable to the titling of lands
          of the State's forest heritage and properties adjacent to or that include bodies of water. This
          verification involves an on-site inspection and technical evaluation of the property by MiAmbiente
          field supervisors, which consists of a form (Field Technical Inspection Report) with questions on


percent (60%) of natural forests, only the favorable concept will be required and the land use and management plan will not be
required; 3. For properties with areas greater than five (5) hectares, the complete process of favorable concept will be necessary.

                                                                                                                               30


                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
          the location and data of the property, data on the applicant for the titling, data of neighbors, brief
          characterization of the current use of the land, natural resources and special conditions, ending
          with the technical recommendations in accordance with the state of natural resources. The result
          determines whether MiAmbiente grants or denies, based on the applicable legislation10, the
          favorable concept to continue with the adjudication of forest heritage lands. The resolution by
          which MiAmbiente issues this concept may include provisions for the sustainable use and
          management of the forest, soil, or water present on the property, as well as use restrictions aimed
          at preventing forest conversion or improper changes in land use. ANATI must contemplate these
          provisions in the deed of title of the property and the owner of the property must comply with them.

     o    Directorate of Protected Areas and Biodiversity: This is the MiAmbiente agency responsible for
          administering SINAP and regulating the use of ecosystems and species of high ecological value. In
          the context of the Program, this Directorate will have to validate whether the intervened properties
          overlap with protected areas and mangroves, determining the applicable use restrictions and, when
          applicable, the legal exclusions for titling. In addition, it will provide official geospatial information
          on the layers of the SINAP, the updated buffer zones, issue technical criteria on the compatibility
          of titling activities with conservation regulations, and may carry out technical inspections to verify
          the environmental conditions of the property before ANATI continues with the titling process.

     o    Environmental Impact Assessment Directorate (DEIA): This is the authority responsible for
          reviewing, approving and following up on the environmental management instruments required
          under the Environmental Impact Assessment System, as well as ensuring that all types of works or
          interventions comply with current environmental regulations. The Program does not contemplate
          the construction of new infrastructure, it is only expected to implement works to adapt and improve
          the existing physical infrastructure in regional ANATI offices, at the main headquarters and the
          INGTG, in addition to the installation of CORS stations in rural and urban areas that have the
          minimum conditions of easy access. security, electricity, a clear horizon and the internet. It is
          expected that the environmental impact of these activities will be low and negligible and therefore
          they do not need to be included in the EIA process.

     o    Environmental Performance Verification Directorate: Responsible for verifying environmental
          compliance of projects, plans, works, and facilities with permits or environmental obligations. This
          includes environmental supervision, inspection, monitoring and auditing. In the context of the
          Program, its activities do not need to be supervised by this Directorate.

     o    Water Security Directorate: Responsible for coordinating the sustainable management of the
          country's water resources, including the planning, protection, and monitoring of watersheds, as well


10
   Forest Law (Law 1 of 1994); Resolution No. AG-0391- 2008, which establishes the criteria for the granting of a Favorable
Concept by ANAM (currently MiAmbiente), as part of land titling processes; Article 19 of Resolution ANATI-ADMG-244 of
September 26, 2017, which establishes the Single Regulations for the Review, Approval and Registration of Surveying Plans in
ANATI, on the water sealing of the plans of the properties to be titled; Articles 11, 29, 30, 31 and 53 of Law No. 37 of 1962, which
regulates the Agrarian Reform, on the fulfillment of the social function of the property to be titled.

                                                                                                                                31


                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
          as the promotion of efficient and safe water use. Within the framework of the cadastre, this
          Directorate will provide technical criteria to ensure that territorial information incorporates data on
          water recharge zones, water bodies, protection areas and associated risks, facilitating that
          regularization, titling and territorial planning decisions are aligned with the conservation and
          integral management of water resources. Their role is key to avoid undue pressure on basins and
          ensure that the cadastre contributes to national water sustainability.

     o    Office of Environment and Indigenous Peoples: This office operates as part of the general
          environmental functions of MiAmbiente, to ensure compliance with environmental laws and
          promote the conservation of natural resources, which also includes analysis and guidance on
          indigenous issues insofar as they affect the management of environmentally sensitive resources and
          territory. According to MiAmbiente Resolution DM-0612-2019, the latter must evaluate and
          approve applications for the allocation of collective lands submitted to ANATI when the properties
          overlap protected areas or lands of the State's forest heritage, which may involve interinstitutional
          consultation with other technical entities, such as the Vice Ministry of Indigenous Affairs of the
          Ministry of the Interior. to verify traditional land occupation11. It is emphasized that the PforR will
          not title collective lands. However, there are plans to conduct a pilot pilot to improve ANATI's
          institutional capacity with indigenous peoples.
     o    MiAmbiente Regional Directorates: They are responsible for directing, supervising and
          executing the application of environmental policy, plans, programs and projects at the regional
          level and coordinating with government institutions, municipalities, environmental groups, private
          entities and indigenous regions, actions that contribute to the protection and conservation of natural
          resources and the environment. It works in coordination with these actors in its territory and
          monitors and coordinates the Protected Areas that are under its jurisdiction. Under the Program,
          these entities will be responsible for providing direct support to ANATI in the mass titling processes
          in their territories. Their involvement includes the provision and validation of environmental
          information at the local level, particularly on the boundaries of protected areas and their buffer
          zones, wetlands, mangroves, forest; the issuance of Favorable Concepts for the properties to be
          titled; the issuance of environmental resolutions and the granting of permits for logging and
          extraction of trees. They are also responsible for monitoring compliance with the land management
          and use conditions established in the authorizations and permits they issue.

     • Ministry of Culture (MiCultura)
It is the governing entity in Cultural Heritage, responsible for administering, managing and protecting
Panama's cultural heritage, through specialized directorates such as the National Directorate of Cultural
Heritage, which includes the sections of historical heritage, archaeological and heritage architecture. Within
SINAP are protected areas that are part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site. In the context of the Program,
its role would focus on providing ANATI with official information on assets and areas with cultural value,


11 MiAmbiente Resolution DM-0612-2019 authorizes the Vice-Ministry of Indigenous Affairs of the Ministry of the Interior to

certify, through a technical report, whether the traditional occupation of these collective lands actually began before the creation of
the respective protected areas or the entry into force of Law 1 of February 3, 1994 (Forestry Law).

                                                                                                                                   32


                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
defining restrictions on use applicable to properties with registered or potential heritage, and coordinating
with ANATI to avoid titling or regularization processes that could affect these resources.

     • Ministry of Labor and Labor Development (MITRADEL)
It is the governing body in Occupational Health and Safety in Panama. Through the National Labor
Inspection Directorate, among other functions, to monitor and control compliance with and application of
labor laws, contracts and labor relations, and other technical instructions issued by the other departments
of the Ministry, mainly those relating to working conditions, apprenticeships, occupational health and safety
at work. Oversees compliance with the Labor Code and applicable OHS Regulations in companies and
other workplaces. It can carry out inspections, issues sanctions in case of non-compliance, requires the
existence of OHS committees in public entities and verifies their operation.

    • Social Security Fund (CSS)
Entity responsible for the prevention and care of occupational risks. Through the National Directorate of
Occupational Health and Safety, it promotes occupational risk prevention programs, training and risk
audits; provides guidelines on ergonomics, safe working with electricity, handling loads and risks in offices;
and attends to and records occupational accidents and diseases that may occur in the work environment.



    • Ministry of Health (MINSA)
National health authority It regulates hygiene and health conditions in infrastructure and work spaces,
intervenes in issues related to ventilation, lighting, sanitation and conditions of offices that will be
rehabilitated or used by ANATI. May assess biosafety standards during training/mass activities

     • National Civil Protection System (SINAPROC)
It has the legal responsibility to plan, investigate, direct, supervise and execute policies and actions aimed
at preventing, mitigating, attending to and recovering from disasters or emergencies that may affect the
population and property (including risk of natural or anthropogenic disasters). It is an organization oriented
to comprehensive risk management and civil protection throughout the national territory. SINAPROC
maintains databases and maps on areas vulnerable to floods, landslides and other risks, and interinstitutional
work (for example, on joint maps with the Institute of Meteorology and Hydrology and others) is carried
out to identify areas of risk in the territory. This information can be used by government agencies, including
technical institutions such as ANATI, which can consult it and ask for its collaboration to provide
information during the titling process on areas that are vulnerable or at risk of landslides, floods, etc.

    • Ministry of Public Works (MOP)
Responsible for issuing concepts in areas where the properties are not in a public easement zone, or are not
adjacent to state transportation infrastructure.

    • Ministry of Housing and Land Management (MIVIOT)
There are specific situations in which MIVIOT can intervene when the property is located within areas that
are subject to urban planning, land use regulations, or public housing programs.

                                                                                                           33


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
     • Ministry of Government (MINGOB)
It is responsible for defining government policies and for planning, coordinating, directing and executing
the administrative control of the indigenous provinces and comarcas. In the framework of territorial
governance, its role includes guaranteeing the integral management of the territory, promoting the
harmonization between socioeconomic development, environmental protection and respect for the
collective rights of communities. It has the Vice Ministry of Indigenous Affairs of MINGOB in charge
of planning, directing and coordinating the country's indigenous policy. From the territorial
governance perspective, this vice-ministry promotes the participation of indigenous peoples in
decision-making on the sustainable use and management of their territories, ensuring the
preservation of their cultural identity, the protection of ecosystems, and social equity.

     • National Commission on Political and Administrative Boundaries
Body that provides advice on boundaries between provinces, districts, townships and indigenous regions.
The Commission seeks to guarantee the clear and consensual delimitation of spaces, considering
environmental criteria (such as watersheds and protected areas) and social criteria (such as the equitable
distribution of resources and respect for local communities), contributing to the stability and sustainability
of the territory.

    • Municipalities.
The Municipalities will collaborate in the implementation of the cadastre, providing support with local data,
facilitating processes for their own land, participating in agreements with ANATI, contributing to territorial
updating and maintaining municipal assets, but they do not replace the role of ANATI as national authority.
Their participation in the Program will be formalized through the DGM. In addition, they have relevant
competencies in the control of minor civil works, solid waste and local planning, under Law 37 of 2009 on
the Decentralization of the Public Administration (and its amendments). They may require basic conditions
to prevent accidents in public areas (signage, perimeter closures), supervise public safety conditions in
works within their jurisdiction, and may apply sanctions. Their role is complementary to MITRADEL,
MINSA and MiAMBIENTE, and they exercise it, among others, for permits, control of small works and
waste management.

4.2. PforR Environmental and OHS Policy and Regulatory Framework

Overall, Panama has a strong constitutional and legal recognition of environmental and social rights. Based
on the information available to date on the scope of the Program's activities and the potential environmental
impacts previously identified (paragraph 3.5), it is expected that these will not fall into the categories of
environmental risk and will not require submission to the environmental impact assessment (EIA) process
in accordance with Law 41 of 1998. General Law on the Environment and Executive Decree (DE) No. 1
of 2023, which regulates Chapter III of Title II of the Single Text of Law 1 41 on the EIA process. However,
this will not exempt them from complying with the applicable national, regional and local environmental
and safety and health standards. Table 1 below identifies the environmental and occupational health
regulations applicable to the Program.


                                                                                                           34


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
Table 1. Legal framework for the Program-for-Results in environmental and OHS matters.

          Environmental
                                                                                 Application to the PforR Program
       legislation/regulation
 Political Constitution of the        Chapter 7, on the Ecological Regime, establishes the obligation of the State to guarantee a healthy environment and the
 Republic of Panama of 1972 (last     conservation of natural resources; it establishes the prevention of pollution, the rational use of natural resources, that all
 updated in 2004)                     inhabitants must promote development that avoids ecological degradation, that the law will regulate the exploitation
                                      and benefits of the resources and that the State will adopt measures for their control and preservation.
 National Nature Rights Act (2022,    It recognizes nature as a subject of rights, establishing the duty of the State to protect it. This law grants nature rights
 effective since 2023)                such as exist, persist, and regenerate. It includes a principle "in dubio pro natura": When there is doubt about the
                                      consequences of an activity on an ecosystem, the protection and conservation of the environment must be prioritized,
                                      favoring the least harmful options.
 Law 22 of June 27, 2006, which       This Law establishes the norms, principles, and rules that govern all procedures for the selection of contractors and
 regulates public procurement,        public contracts financed with State funds, including the execution of public works, services, and procurement of goods.
 ordered by Law 153 of 2020, of the   It establishes the incorporation of sustainability criteria in the tender documents, so that procurement, including works
 General Directorate of Public        and services, considers energy efficiency and innovation that contribute to reducing environmental impacts and favors
 Procurement and the MEF              best practices. The Law provides that procurement documents and documents, including bidding documents and
                                      technical specifications, must be published in the Electronic Public Procurement System "PanamaCompra". Within the
                                      framework of the Program, both the works contracts that are required, purchases and operability of technological
                                      equipment, such as drones, CORS stations, among others, must be governed by this Law and therefore incorporate
                                      principles of sustainability and energy efficiency.
 General Law on the Environment       Establish the guiding framework for environmental management in Panama Defines the principles of sustainable
 (LGA). Law 41 of 1998 and its        development, establishes SINAP; establishes that protected areas are public goods under the administration of
 amendments                           MiAmbiente, therefore, they are susceptible to private appropriation or loss of ownership by the State; creates the EIA
                                      process and assigns to MiAmbiente the authority to regulate, supervise, and protect natural resources, including soils,
                                      water, forests, biodiversity, and protected areas. It is the legal basis that defines the mandate and responsibilities of the
                                      MiAmbiente Regional Directorates, supplemented by sectoral regulations issued by the institution itself. Recognizes
                                      the role of municipalities as supporting and coordinating actors in local environmental management.
                                      For the PforR, this law is relevant because it establishes that all activities with potential environmental risk must have
                                      the corresponding evaluation and permits, and it regulates the use and protection of environmentally sensitive areas. In
                                      this context, the cadastral survey and titling processes must respect the legal limits of protected areas and other regulated
                                      spaces, such as watersheds, wetlands, and ecosystems of high ecological value, which implies the coordination and
                                      approval of MiAmbiente. In addition, the LGA incorporates principles of territorial planning, conservation, and

                                                                                                                                                                  35


                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
         Environmental
                                                                               Application to the PforR Program
      legislation/regulation
                                     sustainable land management that must be integrated into cadastral planning and decision-making on land titling and
                                     use, avoiding illegal adjudications or changes of use in environmentally restricted zones. To ensure the legal and
                                     environmental coherence of the system, cartography and cadastral information systems should incorporate official
                                     SINAP polygons.
Executive Decree No. 1 of 2023,      Regulates the EIA process, in accordance with the LGA. Updates the procedure for identifying, classifying, and
which regulates the Chapter of the   managing the environmental impacts of activities, works, or projects in Panama. It establishes three categories of EIAs
Single Text of Law 41 on the EIA     according to the level of risk and criteria for defining the risk category, requires public consultation for the higher risk
process                              categories, and details the requirements for submission, evaluation, citizen participation, and environmental monitoring,
                                     with the Ministry (and regional environmental directorates) being responsible for compliance review and monitoring.
                                     This Decree includes a restrictive list of activities, works, and projects that must be included in the EIA process. For the
                                     Program, this decree is relevant because, according to it, it determines that minor works that the Program is expected to
                                     finance (such as the installation of CORS stations, topographic markers, adaptation of existing infrastructure, operation
                                     of electronic/electrical equipment), would be exempt from the presentation of an environmental assessment and
                                     management instrument.
Act 24, 2006, declaring state-       This law legitimizes and prioritizes land regularization and titling processes at the national level. Combined with Law
executed activities of regulation    41 of 1998 (LGA), it establishes that such processes must be carried out in compliance with current environmental
and mass titling of lands to be of   regulations, which requires the integration of environmental assessment and verification of restrictions by forests,
public order and social interest     coastal zones, water resources or protected areas before issuing titles. This law is key to ensuring that mass titling does
and adopting other provisions.       not cause negative impacts on the environment when formalizing land rights, since it represents a regulatory framework
Regulation No. 228, 2006             that requires compatibility with environmental conservation.
Decree     No.     32-2017-DMySC.    This decree approves a manual that regulates the administration, control, registration, maintenance, incorporation and
Approves the "Manual of General      disposal of state assets, including fixed assets, intangibles, movable property, equipment, infrastructure, etc. It
Rules and Procedures for the         establishes mandatory procedures for public institutions to keep up-to-date inventories, register movements of goods,
Administration and Control of        carry out maintenance, control custody, report obsolete or deteriorated goods, and proceed with their formal disposal.
Patrimonial Assets in the Public     The rule applies to all public sector entities, including those subject to asset control by the Office of the Comptroller
Sector                               General of the Republic and the Ministry of Economy and Finance as the governing body over State assets. Within the
                                     framework of the Program, for the renewal of obsolete technological and computer equipment in ANATI (servers,
                                     computers, stations, cartographic equipment, etc.), the decree is pertinent, since it requires that said goods be registered
                                     and that their replacement or disposal be done under official procedures, with an updated inventory. The decree is geared
                                     toward the asset, accounting, and administrative management of public assets, not environmental regulation. Therefore,



                                                                                                                                                               36


                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
         Environmental
                                                                                Application to the PforR Program
      legislation/regulation
                                      for environmental risk purposes derived from works or renovation, installation and operation of equipment, including
                                      electrical and electronics, it must be complemented by the country's environmental regulations.
Resolution DM-0112-2025. Guide of     Guide approved and regulated by MiAmbiente. It aims to establish basic environmental and OHS measures to prevent,
Good Environmental Practices for      mitigate, and control the impacts from minor construction, remodeling, and maintenance works, when these do not
Renovation and Construction           require an EIA. Table #1 presents the scope, typology and condition of the activities that may be carried out once this
Activities of Minor Buildings.        guide has been implemented, including activities of improvement, rehabilitation and remodeling of up to 2000 m2 of
                                      closed construction area. It also describes the activities related to Table 1 exempt from an environmental management
                                      instrument, such as the modification of internal spaces (open and/or closed) of offices, construction of booths, perimeter
                                      fences, installation of prefabricated structures, or others. This guide is pertinent because according to the definition of
                                      its scope and exclusions, it is understood that the activities of the Program related to the conditioning or improvement
                                      of ANATI offices, installation of CORS stations that require small civil works (concrete bases, electrical conduits,
                                      technical booths, etc.); installation and renewal of electrical and electronic equipment will be exempt from an
                                      environmental management instrument, which does not exempt them from complying with environmental management
                                      and OHS proportional to their impacts.
Forest Law of Panama. Law No. 1       The Forest Law establishes the framework for the administration, management, conservation, and sustainable use of the
of 1994                               State's forest heritage, including natural forests, forest lands, and plantations. Article 12 declares the State's Forest
                                      Heritage inalienable, making it possible to exclude from this declaration those State lands preferably suitable for forestry
                                      on which a social function is being carried out, such as agricultural activities or others aimed at the well-being of the
                                      population. It regulates authorizations for logging, harvesting, and changes in land use, defines reserve zones, and
                                      protects areas with forest cover. For development of the Program, its application is based on the fact that the titling of
                                      land with forests requires prior verification by MiAmbiente, through the Forestry Directorate, to avoid adjudications
                                      that encourage deforestation or loss of habitat. In addition, it requires coordination with the forestry authority to ensure
                                      that the cadastre incorporates relevant environmental information and complies with the legal restrictions applicable to
                                      forest lands.
Law 69 of 2017. Creates a system of   This Law aims to protect, recover and conserve forest cover, in compliance with the objectives of the Alliance for the
economic and fiscal incentives to     Million Reforested Hectares and the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals. It establishes benefits for landowners and
promote the conservation of           communities that maintain or increase forest cover, as well as mechanisms for registering and verifying such areas with
natural forests, restoration, and     MiAmbiente. It is important for the Program, since cadastral information must incorporate and respect the areas
sustainable management of forest      registered under these incentives, avoiding adjudications that affect protected forests and facilitating coordination
cover lands                           between ANATI and Miambiente to ensure that property rights are compatible with conservation and sustainable
                                      management objectives.

                                                                                                                                                                37


                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
         Environmental
                                                                                  Application to the PforR Program
      legislation/regulation
Resolution No. AG-0391-2008            The resolution establishes technical criteria for MiAmbiente to issue a Favorable Concept as a prerequisite for land
Establishing criteria for granting a   titling, particularly in the case of land that forms part of the State's forest heritage. In the case of applications for the
favorable concept to ANAM (now         adjudication of lands of the State Forest Heritage located in areas classified as rural towns and/or rural areas with similar
MiAmbinete), as part of land titling   conditions, within the areas of regularization of PRONAT, the following criterion will be applied: 1. For properties with
processes, within the framework of     areas less than or equal to one (1) hectare, the procedure of favorable concept of MiAmbiente will not be necessary; 2.
the National Land Administration       For properties with areas greater than one (1) hectare and less than or equal to five (5) hectares, which do not have more
Program (now ANATI).                   than sixty percent (60%) of natural forests, only the favorable concept will be required and the land use and management
                                       plan will not be required; 3. For properties with areas greater than five (5) hectares, the complete process of favorable
                                       concept will be necessary. It requires a field inspection and technical evaluation of the land, verifying compatibility with
                                       its forestry vocation, the existence of forests, bodies of water or other environmental characteristics. If the property
                                       meets these criteria, the award is approved; otherwise, it is rejected to protect forests, water resources and avoid
                                       conversion of land use.
Law 80 of 2009 - Law on Titling in     This Law regulates the recognition of possessory rights and the titling of State lands located in coastal and island areas.
Coastal Zones and Island Territory     It incorporates the mass titling procedure in these areas only if they meet the specific conditions provided for in this
                                       Law. ANATI has the authority to process individual land title applications. However, it will preferably apply the mass
                                       titling procedure provided for in Law 24 of 2006, and as long as the area where the land to be titled is located is declared
                                       an area of regularization and mass titling, the individual applications submitted must be included within the respective
                                       mass titling processes.
                                       Article 10 of Law 80 establishes clear limitations that exclude critical ecological areas, such as mangroves, protected
                                       areas, indigenous territories, etc., from titling. Although the Program does not include mass titling in coastal areas and
                                       islands, this article complements those established in the LGA regarding the protection of public domain assets.
MiAmbiente resolution DM-0612-         This Resolution establishes the legal criteria to be applied by MiAmbiente to determine the viability of granting approval
2019 On the approval of                to applications for the allocation of collective lands submitted by indigenous communities through their recognized
applications for the allocation of     traditional authorities, whose polygons overlap partially or totally with protected areas or lands of the State's forest
collective lands                       heritage. The latter instructs the Vice-Ministry of Indigenous Affairs of the Ministry of the Interior to certify, by means
                                       of a technical report, whether the traditional occupation of these collective lands did indeed begin before the creation of
                                       the respective protected areas or the entry into force of Law 1 of February 3, 1994 (Forestry Law).
                                       It is emphasized that the PforR will not title collective lands. However, there are plans to conduct a pilot pilot to improve
                                       ANATI's institutional capacity with indigenous peoples.
Law No. 33, 2018 Which establishes     This Law institutionalizes comprehensive waste management under the circular economy approach, obliging public and
the Zero Waste Policy and its          private generators to implement source separation, minimization, recycling, recovery and proper disposal. Article 11

                                                                                                                                                                  38


                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          Environmental
                                                                                   Application to the PforR Program
       legislation/regulation
framework       of      action for       states that where hazardous or specially managed wastes are generated, they should be segregated at the source and
comprehensive waste management,          managed in a differentiated manner. Public and private generating entities must implement separation, recycling, or
and dictates other provisions            special disposal programs that ensure proper collection and treatment, avoiding mixing with ordinary waste. The Law
                                         also promotes the adoption of the waste hierarchy: prevention, reduction, reuse, recycling or safe disposal, also
                                         applicable to electronic waste.

                                         Within the framework of the Program, which provides for minor works, renovation of technological equipment and
                                         generation of e-waste, this law is relevant because it establishes obligations for responsible waste management.
                                         However, although the law defines the general principles and obligations for hazardous waste and electronic waste, the
                                         country still lacks specific technical regulations that regulate in detail the handling, treatment, and disposal of WEEE
                                         as a distinct category, that is, the law provides a general framework, but there is a lack of regulations or decrees that
                                         structure mandatory procedures. Specific licenses and control mechanisms for electronic and electrical waste.
Law 69 of October 12, 2012 for the       This law establishes the general guidelines of the national policy for the rational and efficient use of energy in Panama,
Rational and Efficient Use of            applicable to public and private entities. It promotes the acquisition, import, and use of equipment and technologies
Energy (UREE)                            with better energy efficiency rates, as well as the replacement of obsolete and inefficient equipment. Within the
                                         framework of the Program, this law is relevant for activities that involve the purchase and operation of technological
                                         equipment, electrical infrastructure, and CORS stations, as it seeks to incorporate energy efficiency criteria into public
                                         procurement processes and in the operational management of ANATI's facilities, helping to reduce energy consumption.
                                         operating costs and associated environmental impacts, consistent with the Program's sustainability objectives.
General Law of Culture. Law 175 of       It establishes principles, attributions and commitments of the State for cultural public policy and the protection of the
2020                                     country's cultural heritage, and recognizes MiCultura as the technical entity responsible for aspects of cultural heritage.
                                         The obligation to consider cultural heritage and coordinate with MiCultura exists within the framework of the General
                                         Law of Culture for the protection of cultural property, but it is not integrated as a formal requirement within Law 24 of
                                         2006 on mass titling or its regulations.
Law 14 of 1982 on the custody,           It establishes the framework for identifying, protecting, conserving and regulating the use of the country's historical,
conservation and administration of       archaeological, architectural and cultural heritage, under the supervision of the National Institute of Culture (now the
the historical heritage of the nation,   Ministry of Culture). It regulates the intervention in heritage assets, requires special permits for works in historic areas
and dictates other provisions. Law       and prohibits activities that may alter or destroy archaeological sites or protected buildings. In the context of the
58 of 2003 (modifies articles of Law     Program, these regulations would be relevant because the presence of heritage assets or areas would have to be verified
14)                                      during the delimitation and registration of properties, coordination with the Ministry of Culture when there are protected



                                                                                                                                                                   39


                                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
         Environmental
                                                                               Application to the PforR Program
      legislation/regulation
                                     elements, and ensure that minor renovations (e.g., ANATI offices in historic areas) comply with the applicable heritage
                                     restrictions and procedures.
Panama Labor Code                    Panama's Labor Code is the legislation that regulates labor relations between employers and workers in the country,
                                     establishing rights and obligations for both parties. Its mandatory provisions cover aspects such as minimum wage,
                                     working hours, vacations, social security, and causes of dismissal. In addition, it establishes that, in case of doubt or
                                     conflict, the interpretation most favourable to the worker will be applied. The activities of the Program shall apply the
                                     provisions of this Code.
General Regulations for the          It establishes the technical and organizational standards to identify, evaluate and control occupational risks, regulating
Prevention of Occupational Risks     issues such as safe conditions in construction sites and offices, equipment handling, electrical risks, ergonomics,
and Occupational Health and          signage, internal inspections and obligations of employers and contractors in terms of hygiene, safety, working
Safety. Resolution No.45,588-2011-   conditions, protective equipment, occupational health programs; It also includes work environment monitoring, first
J.D. of February 17, 2011            aid, emergency plans, training, etc. Within the framework of the Program, it provides the mandatory OHS framework
                                     for activities involving field work, technical facilities, transportation and handling of equipment, as well as minor
                                     remodeling in ANATI's offices, requiring standardized and adequate preventive measures to be implemented.
Law 37 of 2009 that Decentralizes    This law empowers local governments to regulate, supervise, and provide public services related to urban environmental
the Public Administration (and its   management, including waste collection and disposal, control of discharges, land use planning, permits to occupy roads,
amendments).                         and supervision of minor works in their jurisdiction. Regarding OHS, although the Labor Code and the Ministry of
                                     Labor (MITRADEL) have national competence, municipalities exercise complementary functions through construction
                                     permits, basic inspections, and regulation of commercial activities that must comply with health and safety standards.
                                     For the multipurpose cadastre, these competencies are relevant because the municipalities participate in the
                                     authorization of small works, management of generated waste, verification of compliance with local environmental
                                     ordinances and support in the supervision of activities that may generate risks for workers or the community.
Law 37 of 1962 which regulates the   Law 37 of 1962, as the first Agrarian Code of Panama, established the principle that land ownership must fulfill a social
Agrarian Reform and dictates         function, oriented to productive use, equity in tenure and the prohibition of the grabbing of idle lands; this principle
other provisions.                    constitutes the historical legal basis for institutions such as ANATI and MiAMBIENTE to demand today compliance
                                     with social and environmental conditions in the processes of adjudication, titling and land use, principles that were later
                                     reinforced and updated by the current Agrarian Code (Law 55 of 2011) by expressly incorporating the environmental
                                     function and sustainable use of land.
Resolution No. DM-0627, which        Through this regulation, the Minister of the Environment delegates the power to approve/deny favorable concepts for
delegates to the Forestry Director   the adjudication of forest lands. It specifies that the Forestry Director acts in cases of areas greater than 50 hectares or
and regional directors of the

                                                                                                                                                               40


                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
           Environmental
                                                                                 Application to the PforR Program
        legislation/regulation
 Ministry of the Environment             with natural forest cover greater than 20 hectares. It seeks to streamline administrative processes and improve the
 (MiAmbiente) the function of            management of the national forest heritage, delegating powers to regional and forestry authorities.
 granting or denying the favorable
 concept for the adjudication of
 lands of the State's forest heritage.


4.3.Social Policy and Regulatory Framework

Panama has an extensive and solid social regulatory framework, supported by an institutional architecture that clearly defines roles and
responsibilities at all levels. However, despite this regulatory richness and the existence of clear structures, the mechanisms of surveillance,
implementation and territorial management show limitations, especially at the regional and local levels.

Table 2. Regulatory framework applicable to the PforR in social matters.

               Social legislation/regulation                                               Application to the PforR Program
  INCORPORATION
                                                           The Constitution establishes the normative and political basis that obliges the State to exercise public
                                                           power in a representative manner and originating in the popular will; This legitimizes the fact that
  Political Constitution 1972
                                                           the National Multipurpose Cadastre Program 2025-2035 is a public instrument, subject to
  Articles 1 and 2
                                                           democratic control and with an obligation to guarantee territorial equality, access to public
                                                           information and social participation.
  LAWS
                                                           The National Multipurpose Cadastre Program 2025-2035 aims to modernize the national cadastre,
                                                           with digital processes and inter-institutional exchange of cadastral and registry information. In this
  Law 81 of March 26, 2019 "On the protection of
                                                           framework, the mass management of personal data (owners, occupants, beneficiaries, coordinates
  personal data"
                                                           linked to people) requires establishing protocols, processes and procedures for management and
  Article 7
                                                           secure transfer, protecting the rights of holders over their data under the precepts of the Personal
                                                           Data Protection Law.




                                                                                                                                                                 41


                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
           Social legislation/regulation                                             Application to the PforR Program

                                                     Law 37 requires the State to carry out consultation processes and obtain free, prior, and informed
Law 37 of August 2, 2016 "Establishing the Prior,    consent when administrative measures or projects may affect indigenous peoples. For ANATI, this
Free, and Informed Consultation and Consent of       means that any survey, updating or publication of cadastral information that affects indigenous
Indigenous Peoples"                                  regions or territories must be accompanied by adapted information, communication and participation
                                                     processes.
                                                     Law 66 establishes the process of decentralization of the public administration that goes through
                                                     stages, including the preparation and strengthening of capacities for the management of the resources
Law 66 of October 29, 2015 "Decentralizing the       transferred to local governments. It also describes how the planning processes of land use
Public Administration"                               management for sustainable development will take place. The Program will modernize the
Article 19 and 20                                    multipurpose national cadastre system and select municipalities for cadastral surveys and land titling
                                                     assessments, which will result in a reduction in response times for the entity to the benefit of
                                                     landowners.
                                                     Law 149 establishes the right of older adults to have their physical, mental and moral integrity
Law 149 of April 24, 2009 "Amending Law 36 of        respected. This right includes the protection of their image, thought, dignity, and values, as well as
2016 on the comprehensive protection of the rights   participation in the country's productive process. The PforR will address land tenure through the
of older adults.
Article 3                                            modernization of the cadastre system, with an important focus on legal and economic security for
                                                     all.


                                                     The Agrarian Code establishes the legal framework for the tenure, adjudication, and sustainable use
Law 55 of March 23, 2011 "Adopting the Agrarian      of rural land, as well as the organization of agrarian jurisdiction in Panama. When modernizing the
Code"                                                cadastre, ANATI must ensure that cadastral information and processes respect and facilitate the
Article 5                                            instruments provided for by the Code (adjudications, regularizations, penalties for hoarding),
                                                     preventing digitalization from generating legal uncertainty or facilitating speculative practices.


                                                     ANATI is the executing agency of the program as the competent entity of the Panamanian State to
                                                     regulate and ensure compliance with and application of policies, laws, and regulations on land and
Law 59 of October 8, 2010 "Creating ANATI"
                                                     other immovable property, and to recommend the adoption of national policies on these matters or
                                                     assets.




                                                                                                                                                         42


                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
            Social legislation/regulation                                                 Application to the PforR Program

Law 80 of 31 December 2009 to recognize possessory        ANATI is the competent authority to manage titling in the coastal zone, in the island territory and in
rights and regulate titling in coastal areas and the      the continental territory in accordance with the provisions of the Law. The PforR will modernize the
island territory in order to guarantee their optimum      cadastre system by facilitating the interoperability of SIICAR to ensure that the adjudication, titling,
use                                                       and regularization processes take into account environmental constraints, avoiding regulatory
Article 1                                                 conflicts, and ensuring sustainability.

Law 72 of 2008, which establishes the special
procedure for the adjudication of collective land         The PforR will only admit selected areas that meet certain requirements, in the case of titling of
ownership of indigenous peoples who are not within        collectively owned lands it will only apply to specific areas with certain indigenous communities
the comarcas                                              selected to intervene through the Program.
Article 4

Law 24 of July 5, 2006, declaring the activities of
                                                          The proposed transformations in the PforR aim at sectoral improvements to overcome structural
regularization and mass titling of lands carried out
                                                          failures, including streamlining processes such as mass land allocation.
by the State to be of public order and social interest.


Law 6 of January 22, 2002 "Which dictates rules for       The Transparency Law is fundamental for the modernization of the cadastre in Panama because it
transparency in public management and establishes         obliges ANATI to guarantee responsible public access to cadastral information, transparency in
the action of habeas data"                                processes and accountability, without prejudice to the protection of personal data and legal security


The Law on Equal Opportunities for Persons with
Disabilities requires that the modernization of the
                                                          The Law on Equal Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities requires that the modernization of the
cadastre be accessible, inclusive and contemplate
                                                          cadastre be accessible, inclusive and contemplate reasonable adjustments in processes, formats and
reasonable adjustments in processes, formats and
                                                          attention; This is essential to guarantee equal access to cadastral information and to titling and
attention; This is essential to guarantee equal access
                                                          regularisation services.
to cadastral information and to titling and
regularisation services.


                                                          Law 4 of 1999 requires that the modernization of the cadastre incorporate a gender perspective:
Act 4 of 29 January 1999 instituting equal
                                                          guaranteeing equal access to titles, participation in cadastral processes, and affirmative measures to
opportunities for women
                                                          correct inequalities in land tenure and use.

                                                          The modernization of the cadastre that is proposed to be implemented must guarantee the protection
Act No. 7 of February 5, 1997 creating the Office of
                                                          of rights, independent supervision and channels for claims and redress under the Office of the
the Ombudsman
                                                          Ombudsman that constitutes for the actor program of control, mediation and guarantee of rights.

                                                                                                                                                                43


                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
            Social legislation/regulation                                                 Application to the PforR Program
EXECUTIVE DECREES

                                                          Executive Decree No. 223 of 2020 is crucial for the modernization of the cadastre because it
Executive Decree No. 223 of June 29, 2020
                                                          operationalizes Law 72/2008 on the adjudication of indigenous collective property outside comarcas,
"Regulating Law 72 of 2008, which establishes the
                                                          imposing procedures, delimitation criteria and guarantees that ANATI must incorporate in
special procedure for the adjudication of collective
                                                          methodologies, field protocols and data publication rules. Its application requires consultation
land ownership of indigenous peoples who are not
                                                          protocols, registration of evidence, and specific cadastral layers to avoid violations and territorial
within the comarcas"
                                                          conflicts.


                                                          The 3-1-1 Citizen Service Center is a key operational tool for the modernization of the ANATI
Executive Decree No. 584 of July 26, 2011 "By which
                                                          cadastre: it facilitates single channels for service, follow-up of procedures and transparency in claims
the 3-1-1 Citizen Service Center is created"
                                                          and cadastral requests, improving governance and the citizen experience



Executive Decree No. 45 of June 7, 2010 "Regulating
Law 80 of December 31, 2009 and amending
                                                          The 3-1-1 Citizen Service Center is a key operational tool for the modernization of the ANATI
Executive Decree 228 of 2009, to recognize
                                                          cadastre: it facilitates single channels for service, follow-up of procedures and transparency in claims
possessory rights and regulate titling in coastal zones
                                                          and cadastral requests, improving governance and the citizen experience
and insular territory in order to guarantee their
optimal use.


Executive Decree No. 228 of September 27, 2006
"Regulating Law 24 of July 5, 2006 declaring of           It defines procedures, evidentiary requirements, and assurance to be incorporated into PforR
public order and social interest the activities of        methodologies, metadata, and governance. Compliance with these guarantees reduces legal and
regularization and mass titling of lands executed by      social risks and ensures the validity of securities issued
the State"

RESOLUTIONS

Resolution ANATI-DAG 553 of November 19, 2020             ANATI has within its organizational structure the Coordination Office of the User Service Center
"Creating within the National Directorate of              that fulfills the functions of collaborating, coordinating and effectively supporting the tasks of
Administration and Finance, the Coordination              reception, distribution, destination and processing of queries that enter the CAU at the national level
Office of the User Service Center"                        (headquarters) or regional (regional administrations).



                                                                                                                                                                44


                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
            Social legislation/regulation                                                Application to the PforR Program
Resolution ANATI-ADMG-243 of September 26,
                                                         Resolution 243 creates the Single Procedure Manual that unifies criteria for regularization and
2017 "Establishing the single procedure manual for
                                                         titling, which converts its requirements into preconditions for any degree or registration to be legally
the regularization of real estate and the adjudication
                                                         sound; ANATI publishes and maintains these regulations as part of its institutional regulatory
and titling of possession rights" and its Amending
                                                         framework.
Resolutions ANATI-DAG-322 of October 24, 2019
                                                         Resolutions 322/2019 and 076/2020 introduce operational modifications that may alter evidentiary
and Resolution ANATI-DAG-076 of February 28,
                                                         requirements, deadlines or internal competencies.
2020.

Resolution ADMG 391 of September 16, 2014, which
                                                         Resolution ADM-391 of September 16, 2014, which repeals Agreement 51/2007 and approves new
repeals Agreement 51 of February 27, 2007, and
                                                         forms and documents for regularization and mass titling, is a key operational instrument that should
approves the new forms and documents for the land
                                                         be incorporated in its entirety into the design of the modernization of the cadastre system to
regularization and mass titling processes being
                                                         guarantee legal validity, traceability of files, and coherence between technical and administrative
carried out by the State and other provisions are
                                                         processes.
issued.


                                                         The Guide formalizes the 3-1-1 Center as a single point of contact between citizenship and the State,
Resolution 12 of February 19, 2019 "By which the         which allows ANATI: (1) to register and audit all cadastral applications with a unique number; (2)
Guide for the Implementation, Operation and              measure response times and quality of service; (3) refer cases to local actors while maintaining
Administration of the 3-1-1 Citizen Service Center       traceability; and (4) use citizen demand to prioritize cadastral surveys and updates. Integrating 3-1-
within the AIG is approved"                              1 improves Program legitimacy and reduces duplicative functions of receiving and managing
                                                         complaints and inquiries.




                                                                                                                                                               45


                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
4.4. ANATI's Social Institutional Framework

In order to carry out its social functions, ANATI has, within its organizational structure, administrative units
with direct competence to ensure respect for the rights of ownership and possession of land or immovable
assets throughout the national territory, including:

    •   Office of Public Affairs In charge of directing and disseminating programs and information,
        through the different communication and information platforms, including the attention of the
        institutional mail for complaints (denuncias@anati.gob.pa) and social media (@anatipma).
    •   Legal Advisory Office, the body competent to answer legal queries made by administrative units,
        individuals, and public entities, regarding the interpretation and application of laws, rules,
        regulations, and procedures on land administration. It is also responsible for drafting internal
        regulations, agreements, contracts and other administrative acts submitted by the administrative
        units of ANATI.
    •   Institutional Human Resources Office responsible for providing and developing a highly
        qualified and motivated human resource, to achieve the objectives and goals of ANATI. It has a
        training area in charge of the development and growth of human talent, the area of labor relations
        and well-being of public servants that ensures the application of legal norms to safeguard the
        guarantees of public servants and social inclusion and the area of equalization and equal
        opportunities that provides advice on gender and disability issues.
    •   User Service Centre (CAU): attached to the National Directorate of Administration and Finance,
        in charge of receiving and responding to requests, questions, complaints from users about the
        service of land procedures; providing technical assistance and guidance on the correct use of the
        good and services. Under the CAU the 311 system is managed for queries, complaints and/or
        suggestions 24/7 (http://311.gob.pa/registro-de-casos/)
    •   Regional Administrations: represent ANATI at the regional level, responsible for directing and
        executing land policies at the regional level, through the application of laws and regulations
        governing land administration and other immovable property, in order to contribute to the
        modernization of the national cadastre. ANATI has ten regional administrations: Bocas del Toro,
        Coclé, Colón, Chiriquí, Darién, Herrera, Los Santos, Panamá Este, Panamá Oeste and Veraguas.
        Depending on the volume of procedures, the CAUs have been expanded at the regional level and
        coordination is maintained with the main headquarters for the attention of users on the status of
        their procedures.
    •   National Directorate of Massive Adjudication: in charge of executing the activities of
        regularization and mass titling of lands carried out by the State that are of public order and social
        interest, in order to have a multipurpose cadastre and improve access to land tenure. Through this
        directorate, bidding documents can be prepared for the implementation of land regularization and
        mass titling projects through service providers that must comply with ANATI guidelines for work
        at the community level. This directorate has a high level of interaction and contact with users at the
        community level and also with municipal stakeholders who keep the list of areas pending
        regularization.
    •   National Directorate of Indigenous Lands and Municipal Property is responsible for directing,
        organizing, and conducting the special procedure for the free adjudication of collective ownership

                                                                                                             46


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
        of lands traditionally occupied by indigenous peoples and communities. In addition, it is
        responsible for managing the transfers of national lands in favor of the Municipalities. The
        management maintains bilateral communication with the authorities of each territory requesting
        collective property, as well as with the municipalities, according to the requests submitted.

4.5. Assessment against the core principles of the PforR

This section summarizes the consistency of Panama's systems with the six core principles of PforR of the
World Bank and identifies the main challenges and areas for strengthening.

Basic Principle 1. The Program's environmental and social management systems are designed to (a)
promote environmental and social sustainability in the Program's design; (b) avoidance,
minimization, or mitigation of adverse impacts; and (c) promote informed decision-making regarding
the environmental and social effects of the Program.

Overall, Panama's legal framework provides a solid foundation for environmental and social management
(an LGA, an established EIA process, protected areas laws, laws on regularization and mass titling of lands
and adjudication of collective ownership of indigenous peoples' lands, transparency in public management
law, etc.), has an environmental authority (MiAmbiente) with a clear mandate to manage SINAP and
environmental licenses, availability of environmental and social data (protected areas, land use, social
indicators) that can be integrated into Program decision-making. Law 22/2006, which regulates public
procurement, and Law 69/2012 on the rational and efficient use of energy, provide the basis for promoting
sustainability and energy efficiency in public works procurement, as well as the purchases and operability
of technological equipment, such as drones, CORS stations, servers, among other equipment financed by
the Program. On the other hand, Law 33/2018 (Zero Waste Policy) establishes general principles and
obligations applicable to ordinary, hazardous, special handling and electronic waste, such as separation
from the source, differentiated management, implementation of separation, recycling or special disposal
programs by public and private generating entities, and the promotion of prevention. reduction, reuse,
recycling, or safe final disposal. In addition, the management of technological equipment, furniture, or other
heritage assets that are discarded as obsolete or deteriorated, as part of the implementation of the Program,
must be carried out in accordance with the mandatory procedures established in the "Manual of General
Standards and Procedures for the Administration and Control of Heritage Assets in the Public Sector,"
which ensures that the management of such equipment is under control. In the social sphere, the
sustainability of interventions is promoted by developing guidelines for cultural adaptation and inclusion
to be incorporated into the procedures, as well as building the capacities of the work teams to handle
consultations, complaints, claims, and objections to land tenure so that they are addressed promptly and in
accordance with due process in order to prevent or minimize the escalation of social tensions or conflicts.

Although the regulatory framework is sound for managing direct and indirect impacts, as well as impacts
associated with minor works foreseen in the Program, a number of gaps have been identified. These include:




                                                                                                           47


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
(i)     Waste management, including WEEE. Law 33 of 2018 (Zero Waste Policy) establishes general
        principles and obligations for the management of different types of waste (ordinary, hazardous,
        special handling and electronic). In addition, the implementation of the "Manual of General
        Standards and Procedures for the Administration and Control of Heritage Assets in the Public
        Sector" guarantees the controlled disposal of technological equipment and other ANATI assets
        that are obsolete or deteriorated (this Manual applies only to equipment, and not to electrical
        components or parts thereof). However, ANATI does not have documented internal procedures
        that provide clear guidelines for its staff to ensure differentiated management, in accordance
        with current regulations, of waste generated by Program-financed activities associated with
        internal works to upgrade or refurbish offices and the installation and operation of technological
        equipment. such as construction waste, cardboard, paint packaging, electrical and electronic
        waste, plastics, among others. This waste can end up disposed of with ordinary waste in
        municipal landfills.

(ii)    Management of indirect impacts on forests resulting from titling, given that environmental
        assessment procedures are not formally integrated into the Program's activities and are outside
        the responsibility of ANATI (all of which correspond to MiAmbiente). In addition,
        MiAmbiente has limited capacities and resources to implement strict controls over land use in
        titled forested areas.

(iii)   There is no systematic assessment of cadastral sites or titling processes by ANATI for
        environmental or social risks. Decisions on where and how to conduct topographic surveys and
        land titling are based on technical and demand considerations, with no consideration of
        environmental sensitivity or social context (unless issues are raised informally). Therefore,
        there is a risk that some Program actions could generate outcomes that are not aligned with
        sustainability (e.g., favoring deforestation in forest lands) if they are not monitored proactively.

(iv)    Institutional capacity is limited. ANATI has historically had limited staff or experience in E&S
        matters as its mandate is considered administrative. It coordinates with other entities when clear
        issues arise (for example, with MiAmbiente if a requested title overlaps with a national park,
        or with the Vice-Ministry of Indigenous Affairs and indigenous authorities of the comarcas or
        collective lands), but these interactions are on a case-by-case basis. There is no formalized
        framework for interinstitutional collaboration on sustainability issues within the Program, nor
        for information sharing or interoperability of databases between institutions.

(v)     Absence of a standardized ex-ante social assessment for the programming and prioritization of
        cadastral survey and titling. There is no mandatory social screening to identify risks of
        exclusion, vulnerability, or conflict (for example, the presence of female-headed households,
        persons with disabilities, indigenous populations outside the regions, high informality, or a
        history of disputes). Without such analysis, decisions may fail to incorporate critical social
        variables, increasing the risk of adverse impacts or inequitable outcomes.



                                                                                                         48


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
    (vi)     Culturally pertinent and accessible participatory mechanisms are limited and not standardized.
             Although there are channels (service posts, Line 311, emails, networks), there is no minimum
             package of adapted materials (indigenous languages, easy reading, disability-inclusive formats,
             offline media), nor a protocol for feedback and community verification. This limits the quality
             of participation and the understanding of the Program's effects for informed decision-making.

In summary, under this Principle 1, the Program would benefit from: (i) internal policies and procedures
for the management and disposal of waste (including WEEE), which provide for source segregation,
recycling and/or special disposal, and which ensure adequate collection and treatment, avoiding mixing
with ordinary waste; as part of the Program's environmental mitigation measures; (ii) formal and systematic
integration of environmental, OHS, and social considerations in programming and decision-making,
including ex ante screening and management of indirect impacts (e.g., in forests) in coordination with
MiAmbiente; (iii) institutional capacity building (technical and with competent personnel) in environmental
and social safeguards and interinstitutional coordination with data interoperability, within ANATI and with
other key institutions such as MiAmbiente; (iv) a standardized ex-ante social assessment with vulnerability
indicators and inclusion measures; (v) participation mechanisms that are culturally pertinent and accessible,
standardized and verifiable; and (vi) improvements in the capture and traceability of key social data in the
cadastral file and associated systems for informed decision-making, with the appropriate personnel for this
purpose. .

Core Principle 2: The Program's environmental and social management systems are designed to
avoid, minimize, or mitigate adverse impacts on natural habitats and physical cultural resources
resulting from the Program. Program activities involving significant conversion or degradation of
critical natural habitats or critical physical cultural heritage are not eligible for PforR funding.

The Program does not directly involve major civil works that may result in land use conversion. However,
by allowing formal ownership of land, it could indirectly affect natural habitats. Panama's Natural Habitats
Protection System focuses on the designation of protected areas and the requirement of EIAs for projects.
Critical natural habitats (such as national parks, wildlife refuges, and wetlands of international importance)
are legally off-limits to harmful development, and the Program will not title lands within protected areas or
their buffer zones (such lands are inalienable public property), nor will it title mangrove and wetland areas.
In fact, the current legislation prohibits the privatization of protected areas and mangrove lands.

However, natural habitats outside protected areas, particularly areas of forest and areas rich in biodiversity,
may be subject to titling. Under current practice, if an individual or community meets the legal criteria for
titling (e.g., demonstrate traditional possession or use of public land without title, demonstrate the social
function of the property, i.e. that it is dedicated to agricultural, forestry, rural housing, etc.), title can be
granted even if the land is environmentally sensitive. provided it is not in a protected area or mangrove
swamp. An environmental assessment is not required at that stage, so Panama's system does not guarantee
that the cadastre and titling process avoids or mitigates impacts on natural habitats outside protected areas.
Properties in forested areas of 1 hectare or less do not require a favorable concept from MiAmbiente for
their titling, so they are not inspected to determine the nature and ecological value of the forest that they

                                                                                                              49


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
may present. However, farms larger than 1 hectare and less than 5 hectares with more than 60 percent forest
cover, or plots larger than 5 hectares, require a PUMTT. However, these plans correspond to a fairly simple
single-sheet form for all properties, which is filled out by the petitioner of the property, where he only has
to indicate the use and management that he will give to the land including the hectares that he will dedicate
to that use, and the measures for the protection of natural resources. of the forest and the existing
biodiversity to be implemented. MiAmbiente, through its regional forestry directorates, is responsible for,
among other things, monitoring compliance with the land management and land use conditions established
in these plans. However, capacity and resource limitations for systematic supervision reduce the
effectiveness of post-titling monitoring, raising the risk of unauthorized changes in land use. Under the
Program, this risk can be mitigated by developing an Environmental Management Protocol in the cadastre
and titling procedures that strengthens the technical and environmental analysis prior to titling, including
the analysis of land to be titled in forested areas smaller than or equal to 1 ha, improving monitoring of
compliance with environmental conditions. and strengthening the institutional coordination between
MiAmbiente and ANATI, as well as the environmental analysis capacities of ANATI's technical staff
involved in the titling process.

Moreover, under the Forest Law12, titling individual properties is conditional on confirmation that the
property serves a social function, failing which the property cannot be titled. In this context, there is a risk
that deforestation, land use change, or agricultural or urban expansion on natural habitats may occur in
order to create or justify a social function prior to titling. Although ANATI uses various mechanisms during
the cadastre and titling process to verify the social use of the property for a minimum period of five years,
including consultations of adjoining properties, review of certifications issued by local authorities,
verification of the most up-to-date Forest Cover and Land Use Map (currently the one from 2021) and
coverage diagnostics. information provided by MiAmbiente, these procedures are neither fully
standardized nor regulated by formal technical guidelines, which limits their consistency and traceability.

To mitigate the risk of deforestation driven by the expectation of titling, standardized processes could be
included as part of the Environmental Management Protocol in the aforementioned Cadastre and Titling
Procedures, to verify the social function of the property, based on official historical geospatial information
in environmentally sensitive areas. This approach would help reduce incentives for unauthorized changes
in land use, strengthen the environmental integrity of the titling process, and ensure Program consistency
with this Principle 2.

In addition, the implementation of this protocol would be strengthened if the ANATI systems could be fed
with geospatial information from MiAmbiente. In this way, ANATI itself could systematically analyze the
spatial overlaps (overlays) between the cadastral information generated in the framework of the Program
and the official environmental cartography of MiAmbiente, including, among others, the shapefiles of the
2021 Forest Cover and Land Use Map, the land cover and land use diagnoses, the boundaries of protected
areas, etc. wetlands, mangroves and other relevant environmental layers, etc.

12 Forest Law. Article 12 declares the State's Forest Heritage inalienable, making it possible to exclude from this declaration those

State lands preferably suitable for forestry on which a social function is being carried out, such as agricultural activities or others
aimed at the well-being of the population.

                                                                                                                                   50


                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
In terms of cultural resources, it is not expected that physical cultural property will be affected by the
programme. Activities are unlikely to involve excavations or infrastructure in areas with known
archaeological sites. Law 14/1982 on National Historical Heritage protects any artifacts discovered, and
any large-scale work would give rise to an EIA, including procedures for chance finds. Since the fieldwork
of the Cadastre Program is limited to topographic surveys and boundary boundaries, the risk to cultural
resources is negligible. Therefore, there are no major deficiencies in the management of cultural property.

However, Articles 42 and 43 of this Law do expressly refer to the obligations and responsibilities of the
owners, possessors or occupiers of properties that contain national monuments or historical heritage assets.
Within the framework of the Program, these articles imply that: (i) the titling of properties that contain
national monuments or historical heritage assets does not exempt the holder from the obligations of
conservation and of requesting prior authorizations for any intervention; (ii) the cadastral survey and titling
must recognize and respect the existence of patrimonial assets, avoiding that the granting of individual
rights generates the expectation of free disposition or modification of the property; (iii) ANATI shall consult
and coordinate with MiCultura when, during the cadastre or titling, properties with cultural heritage assets
are identified, in order to incorporate the obligations of the owner of the property (for example, to allow its
study, contemplation or reproduction) and the corresponding legal restrictions (for example, prohibition to
repair, demolish or destroy them) in the registry and in the title deed.

From the perspective of Principle 2, these articles introduce a risk of impact on cultural heritage if titling
does not properly incorporate legal restrictions and responsibilities. This risk can be mitigated through: (i)
the systematic verification of the presence of heritage assets during the cadastral survey; (ii) annotation of
restrictions on use and conservation in titles and registries; and (iii) the strengthening of coordination
between ANATI and MiCultura.

Core Principle 3: The Program's environmental and social management systems are designed to
protect the safety of the public and workers against potential hazards associated with (a) the
construction and/or operation of facilities or other operating practices under the Program; (b)
Exposure under the Program to toxic chemicals, hazardous wastes, and other hazardous materials;
and (c) reconstruction or rehabilitation of infrastructure located in areas prone to natural hazards.

Program activities, including topographic survey, land demarcation, operation of equipment such as GPS,
drones, and topographic milestones, adaptation of existing physical infrastructure, installation and operation
of technological equipment and CORS stations (activities that are expected to be exempt from the EIA
process and an environmental management instrument), involve minor specific occupational health and
safety (OHS) risks. In addition, ANATI's field teams can operate in remote areas, with rugged terrain, the
presence of wildlife, and adverse weather conditions, as well as require travel by land or river to areas that
are difficult to access. In addition, there are personal security risks in certain areas of the country; for
example, in areas of the province of Darién where illegal activities are taking place or the presence of armed
actors could represent a risk to ANATI personnel.



                                                                                                            51


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
The Panamanian regulatory framework on occupational safety, mainly the Labor Code and the regulations
applicable to the public sector, provides general guidelines for the prevention of occupational risks.
However, in the specific context of the Program, OHS protocols for domestic and small-scale civil works,
installation and operation of technological equipment, as well as fieldwork, are not fully institutionalized,
and their application depends to a large extent on ANATI's internal practices. While ANATI and other
participating entities have experience in fieldwork, they do not always have specific written OHS
guidelines, systematic training programs, and dedicated budgets for the provision of personal protective
equipment (PPE) and other safety supplies. In this context, the pre-identification of hazards associated with
technological equipment installation works and activities and fieldwork and the adoption of preventive and
mitigation measures, such as training, first aid kits, satellite phones, communication protocols, and
emergency response plans, are clear opportunities to strengthen the Program's OHS management. From the
social perspective, conduct protocols and measures to prevent harassment (GBV) resulting from
community-level interaction of ANATI staff or external contractors and community individuals that are not
clear in the current procedures and bidding documents need to be strengthened.

In conclusion, although the OHS risks associated with the Program are mostly moderate and manageable,
their proper management requires the systematic application of prevention and control measures, in line
with national regulations and with Principle 3 of the ESSA. The Program's OHS management would be
strengthened through training and the adoption of formal and consistent procedures that ensure safe working
conditions for ANATI personnel carrying out internal remodeling and adaptation of existing infrastructure,
or for the installation of CORS stations, as well as for personnel carrying out cadastre and titling work in
the field.

Regarding public safety, risks are considered limited, since the Program does not contemplate major works
or the management of hazardous materials with potential impact on nearby communities.



Core Principle 4: The program's environmental and social systems manage land acquisition and loss
of access to natural resources in a way that avoids or minimizes displacement and helps affected
people improve, or at least restore, their livelihoods and standards of living.

The Principle is not applicable in terms of land acquisition or loss of access to natural resources, since the
activities envisaged are limited to updating and interoperability of databases for developing SIICAR,
cadastral regularization, adjudication of tenure rights, and strengthening of institutional capacities. These
activities are of a technical, registry, and territorial information management nature, and do not involve
interventions that require land acquisition or restrict third party access to natural resources.

The Program expressly excludes any expropriation, physical or economic resettlement, and/or restrictions
of access to natural resources that could trigger displacement. As a result, no impacts are expected to trigger
compensation or livelihood restoration demands associated with land acquisition processes.




                                                                                                            52


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
Cadastral regularization and the adjudication of rights strengthen legal security over the property and,
therefore, reduce the probability of any form of displacement associated with uncertainty of tenure. The
nature of the Program's activities is aligned ex ante with the objective of not generating loss of access or
requiring compensation, except by consolidating existing rights or rights in the process of being formalized.

The formalization of tenure also increases the capacity of the owners to use the property as collateral,
facilitating access to credit and productive investment. This is a direct positive social effect of the
intervention, by improving or restoring livelihoods, the intervention not only avoids adverse impacts, but
also creates enabling conditions for sustainable economic improvements.

The PforR maintains systems measures (exclusion criteria, dispute resolution mechanisms, grievance
mechanisms, normed technical procedures) consistent with ensuring that no impacts that contravene this
principle materialize.

Core Principle 5: The Program's environmental and social systems give due consideration to the
cultural appropriateness of, and equitable access to, Program benefits, paying particular attention to
the rights and interests of Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
Traditional Local Communities, and to the needs or concerns of vulnerable groups.

The Program's systems address essential aspects of inclusion, participation and access to information and
have institutional instruments and channels; however, they need to be strengthened to ensure cultural
adaptation and equitable access to the benefits of the Program for women, indigenous peoples, and persons
with disabilities.

The following are presented as key findings:

    •   Gender gaps persist in farm tenure and production: 38.2% of women had an occupied dwelling and
        41.3% were producers, but 31% of farms do not have titles, which increases the risk of exclusion
        from formalization processes.
    •   ANATI uses the cadastral file as a basic instrument, but does not have a survey guide/protocol that
        standardizes a preventive approach for the inclusion of women as owners (individually or jointly).
    •   The fact sheet does not include specific fields for: identifying and verifying disability (recorded
        only in observations) and identification of belonging to one of the seven indigenous ethnic groups
        and possible linguistic barriers (Spanish/mother tongue), despite the fact that more than 50 percent
        of the indigenous population resides outside indigenous territories.
    •   In terms of participation and access to information, there are formal mechanisms (face-to-face and
        digital, e.g., the 311 line, institutional emails, social networks) and a high level of participation by
        municipal stakeholders and indigenous authorities as liaisons. However, interaction is
        predominantly reactive (resolution of procedures/requests), with less emphasis on proactive and
        informed participation.




                                                                                                             53


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
    •   In field operations, information is disseminated to the general and individual public, but the
        existence of standardized and culturally/linguistically adapted materials could not be verified;
        Some materials have been developed ad hoc by staff.

In this sense, strengthening activities are being considered, including: the development and adoption of a
cadastral survey protocol with a gender and inclusion approach (including the promotion of co-
ownership/commonwealth when appropriate); the incorporation of mandatory fields in the cadastral file for
disability, ethnicity and verification of linguistic needs; the design and standardization of culturally and
linguistically adapted informational and participation materials; and the strengthening of proactive
information, consultation and complaint resolution mechanisms accessible to all vulnerable groups. These
actions will allow fuller alignment of implementation with this basic principle and mitigate exclusion risks
in the processes of titling and access to services.

Core Principle 6: The Program's environmental and social systems avoid exacerbating social conflict,
especially in fragile states, post-conflict areas, or areas subject to territorial disputes.

The Program includes preventive measures from the outset of the regularization and mass awarding process
(stages A1–A3) to inform, notify, and guide all parties about the object, scope, and rules of the process, as
well as the channels for attention and the steps to be taken in the event of differences. At critical points
(stages A4 and A10), alternative resolution mechanisms are activated, especially the administrative
mediation offered by ANATI, which make it possible to channel possession disputes without stopping the
operational flow of the rest of the properties, and without undermining due process or individual rights. If
the conflict persists, the standard documentation (secretarial report and ruling) supports the referral to the
administration of justice in accordance with the regulations in force.

The following are presented as key findings:

    •   Critical points of potential conflict: The regularization and mass titling procedure identifies two
        milestones with a greater probability of controversy over possession: the cadastral survey and the
        publicity and summons phase, immediately prior to the mass adjudication. The anticipation of these
        critical points is consistent with good conflict management practices, by placing preventive
        measures at early stages.
    •   Preventive and information measures: The preparation, dissemination, and notification phases
        include detailed communications on objectives, activities, enforcement rules, and channels for
        consultation. These measures seek transparency of the process from the beginning for all actors,
        reduction of uncertainty and rumors that usually detonate conflicts, and clarity on mechanisms to
        avoid and minimize conflicts that may interrupt the operational flow of the properties involved.
    •   Alternative resolution mechanisms: ANATI offers mediation as a prior instance to the ordinary
        courts. If the controversy persists, it is documented by means of a secretarial report and an order to
        send the file to the court. This orderly escalation preserves due process and individual rights and
        avoids unnecessary stoppages, separating the properties in conflict from the rest of the operation
        when appropriate, and keeping the advance on properties without controversy.

                                                                                                           54


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
    •   Instruments and traceability: Execution is supported by a system of forms and documents that are
        mandatory to use, which standardizes administrative action and evidence of the mediation process
        and, if necessary, judicialization. However, the verification of how many cases reach mediation or
        justice relies on manual review, since there is no standardized mechanism for registration and
        follow-up.

To strengthen traceability and conflict risk management, it is recommended that more staff be trained in
alternative conflict resolution mechanisms and that a standardized registration and follow-up system for
mediation and judicial cases be implemented, with indicators of resolution times and outcomes, in line with
this basic principle.

In summary, it concludes that Panama's environmental and social management systems offer a solid
foundation, but there are some challenges in implementation, coordination, and specific procedures
compared to the World Bank's core E&S principles for PforR. It then proposes actions for the Program
Action Plan (PAP) and recommendations to address the identified challenges and strengthen the
environmental and social management performance of the Program.




                                                                                                        55


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
5. E&S MEASURES TO BE INTEGRATED INTO THE PROGRAM ACTION PLAN (PAP)

5.1.E&S management measures

To ensure that the PforR achieves its objectives in accordance with good environmental and social practices,
the following E&S management measures are presented, which will be implemented by the GoP (with
support from the World Bank) during its implementation, and will be detailed in the Program Operating
Manual (POM). These actions address the identified challenges and are designed to improve system
performance, benefiting both the Program and the country's long-term capacity for sustainable land
management:

    1. Strengthen environmental and social capacity at the central level and in ANATI's regional
       administrations.

As part of institutional strengthening, have personnel specialized in environmental and social aspects in the
Program Implementation Unit (ANATI), at the central level. At least one environmental and OHS specialist
and one social specialist (with experience in social participation, possibly with indigenous background)
shall be hired or appointed within the ANATI Program team to implement ESSA actions and be responsible
for the environmental, OHS, and social monitoring of the Program. In addition, a specialist should be
designated to coordinate environmental, OHS, and social aspects of the Program with the specialists at the
central level in each of ANATI's ten regional offices. This action must be done no later than 1 month after
the Effective Date of the Program.

Main functions of the central environmental and occupational health specialist:

•   Serve as a focal point or "liaison" with MiAmbiente, the Ministry of Culture, and SINAPROC, for the
    development of the Program's activities. To this end, carry out the necessary interinstitutional
    coordination actions.
•   Coordinate with the territorially designated environmental, OHS, and social specialists
•   Supervise the Program's environmental management and OHS performance, in line with what is set out
    in this ESSA, in the POM, and in the PAP.
•   Coordinate the feeding of ANATI systems with MiAmbiente geospatial environmental information, and
    lead the use of this information during the Program's processes (see action 2).
•   Develop the environmental management protocol for the cadastre and titling processes (see action 3),
    and then lead and supervise its implementation.
•   Develop the environmental and OHS training plan, in accordance with the provisions of action 4, and
    ensure its implementation.
•   Develop the field security and logistics protocol, and ensure its proper implementation (see action 5).
•   Develop an internal procedure of Good Environmental and Occupational Health and Safety Practices,
    and subsequently ensure and supervise its proper implementation (see action 6).
•   Ensure that the equipment to be acquired, as appropriate, follows the applicable principles of energy
    efficiency established in the national regulations identified in Table 1 of this document.
                                                                                                          56


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
•   Ensure the implementation of the environmental and social measures to be reflected in the Program's
    POM;
•   Implement an adaptive management approach for the Program (identify changes in the environmental
    and occupational health risks and impacts assessed in the ESSA, as well as changes in the E&S systems
    of application to the Program that may require further measures to be adopted);
•   Oversee the application of exclusion criteria defined in Section 3.2.
•   Prepare reports and report to the coordinator of the ANATI implementing unit any incident or accident
    that may occur during the Program's activities;
•   Coordinate and support the preparation of the periodic Program monitoring reports demonstrating
    compliance with the E&S systems applicable to the Program and the measures agreed upon in the
    Program Action Plan (PAP) and the Project Operations Operations Report (POM), as well as other
    reports that may be agreed upon, to be submitted to the World Bank.

Main functions of the social specialist at the central level:

With the objective of ensuring that the Program's social systems incorporate cultural appropriateness,
equitable access, effective conflict management, avoiding the exclusion of vulnerable groups and the
exacerbation of tenure disputes, and the consolidation of the consultation, grievance and grievance
mechanism will have the following functions:

•   Social Planning and Inclusion Approach
    o Integrate gender, disability, and intercultural approaches in the planning and execution of the
       regularization and mass adjudication process.
    o Define criteria and procedures for the identification and prioritization of vulnerable groups
       (women, indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities, underserved rural and urban communities).
•   Operational Protocols and Tools
    o Prepare and/or update cadastral survey protocols with an inclusion approach (co-
       ownership/association, verification of language barriers).
    o Propose and coordinate the incorporation of mandatory fields in the cadastral file for disability,
       ethnic affiliation and linguistic needs.
    o Develop guidelines to prevent the exclusion of women and other groups from ownership and
       registration.
•   Participation, communication and adapted materials
    o Design and standardize culturally and linguistically adapted informational and participation
        materials (including accessible formats).
    o Coordinate proactive information campaigns, ensuring clarity on rules, processes and mechanisms
        for consultations/complaints
    o Strengthen dialogue with indigenous authorities, community leaders, and municipal actors,
        ensuring transparent and understandable processes.
•   Grievances, queries, and alternative dispute resolution management
    o Design, implement, and monitor a standardized system for recording and following up on
        consultations, complaints, and mediations, with time and outcome indicators.

                                                                                                      57


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
    o   Operationalize and coordinate mediation prior to the judicial instance; Develop guidelines to
        preserve individual rights and operational continuity.
    o Establish protocols to segment and manage disputed properties without paralyzing the rest of the
        process.
•   Regulatory Compliance and Due Diligence
    o Align Program procedures with applicable national regulations and the Basic Principles of ESSA.
    o Conduct regular social analyses of risks and gaps (gender, disability, IPs, equitable access)
    o Integrate consent/consultation requirements where applicable, and ensure document traceability of
        decisions.
•   Training and institutional strengthening
    o Design and provide training to field teams and headquarters (ANATI and partners) on inclusion,
        accessibility, mediation, and social due diligence
    o Advise on the institutionalization of good practices and the updating of forms, systems, and social
        protocols.
•   Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting
    o Define social indicators (equitable access, effective participation, conflict resolution) and data
        collection and verification mechanisms
    o Prepare periodic technical reports on the social performance of the Program, with recommendations
        for ongoing improvement.
    o Conduct information quality assessments and social audits of key processes.
•   Interinstitutional coordination and territorial articulation
    o Coordinate with technical units of cadastre, titling, communication, and with justice/mediation
        entities.
    o Coordinate with local governments, indigenous authorities, and community organizations for
        territorially sensitive implementation.
•   Risk Management and Contingency Plans
    o Identify conflict factors at an early stage, design contingency plans, and activate response protocols.
    o Propose mitigation measures to avoid interruption of the operational flow without violating rights.
•   Ethics, transparency and safeguarding of rights
    o Promote standards of transparency, protection of personal data, and respect for individual and
        collective rights.
    o Ensure accessible feedback mechanisms and evidence-based improvement processes.

    2. To allow the integration of MiAmbiente's geospatial information into ANATI's systems.

In this way, ANATI itself could systematically analyze the spatial overlaps (overlays) between the cadastral
information generated in the framework of the Program and the official environmental cartography of
MiAmbiente, including, among others, shapefiles of the most up-to-date Forest Cover and Land Use Map
(to date, the 2021 map), land cover and land use diagnostics, Boundaries of protected areas, wetlands,
mangroves and other relevant environmental layers, etc. This would allow (1) a more systematic, consistent,
and comprehensive environmental analysis of the titling processes than ANATI's processes; (2) strengthen
environmental capacity within ANATI; and (3) speed up the analysis times required in the degree processes.

                                                                                                          58


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
MiAmbiente would continue to issue the favorable Concepts that are necessary, using and validating the
information generated by ANATI. Implementation of this action will help streamline interagency
coordination, reduce duplication in technical analysis, and strengthen the integration of environmental
considerations in the cadastre and titling process, thereby ensuring more informed decision-making aligned
with current environmental regulations. This action must be carried out within the first 12 months after the
effectiveness of the Program.

    3. Develop and apply an environmental management protocol in the Cadastre and Titling
       Procedures.

Develop an environmental management protocol to be applied in the cadastre and titling processes by
ANATI. This protocol must address: (i) the use of MiAmbiente's environmental information to analyze the
overlap of the properties to be titled with PNAs, wetlands, mangroves, and forests, and the process of
requesting corroboration from MiAmbiente; (ii) the use of MiAmbiente's environmental information, in
particular the 2021 land use map and land cover and land use diagnostics to analyze forest cover and social
use over 5 years of each property, including properties in forested areas smaller than or equal to 1 hectare;
(iii) the processes for requesting a concept favorable to MiAmbiente, when applicable; (iv) environmental
field information to be collected and recorded in the case of plots with a forested area, including properties
smaller than or equal to 1 ha, including the identification of potential risks to such formations and potential
management measures; (v) support from MiAmbiente for ANATI to determine cases in which land titling
should not proceed based on the recommendations of the ESSA (in addition to national legal requirements),
such as to consider environmental analysis of plots on forest lands smaller than or equal to 1 ha; and (vi)
outreach / awareness-raising processes for beneficiaries whose land has forest cover, including: application
of the PUMTTs developed (when applicable), the existing economic and fiscal incentive regimes to promote
the conservation of natural forests, the restoration and sustainable management of lands with forest cover,
etc. On this last point, it is suggested that these extension / sensitization activities for beneficiaries be carried
out during the activities of awarding degrees, which are usually carried out in groups, and with the support
of MiAmbiente personnel.

With respect to point (ii) of the previous paragraph, aimed at mitigating the risk of deforestation induced
by the expectation of titling, it is recommended that the protocol incorporates: (a) objective and verifiable
criteria based on time series of official geospatial information (for example, historical land cover and land
use maps); (b) the validation of MiAmbiente for properties located in environmentally sensitive areas or
near natural habitats; and (c) traceability and documentary archiving mechanisms that allow potential future
evaluations of degree decisions.

This protocol will strengthen the environmental management of the Program, standardizing the different
processes necessary to prevent the loss of important ecosystems, limiting cases of deforestation or habitat
destruction before and after titling. The protocol should be approved by the Bank and ready for
implementation within the first six months after effectiveness of the Program.




                                                                                                                  59


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
It is also recommended that this protocol be subsequently translated into an update of the Manual of
Procedures for favorable concepts of MiAmbiente, taking into account not only the processes described in
the protocol, but also current technologies, existing databases, etc.

    4. Develop and subsequently implement the field security and logistics protocol for cadastral
       and titling processes.

Develop standard operating procedures for field operations to improve worker and community safety. This
includes, for example: (a) pre-field mission risk assessments (identifying any security issues, difficult
terrain, wildlife hazards, etc., for each area); (b) provide personal protective equipment (PPE) and
appropriate equipment to field teams (boots, first aid kits, snakebite kits, communication devices, etc.); (c)
ensure that all teams have basic first-aid training and an emergency response plan (know the nearest health
center and have a means of evacuation, such as a reserve vehicle); (d) coordinate with local authorities
(notify community leaders and, if necessary, police or forest rangers) when entering an area for local support
and safety information; and (e) guidelines for respectful interactions with the community. ANATI must
allocate budget for these measures, considering them essential for the management of operational risks.
This protocol must be developed and approved by the Bank no later than the first six months after the
effective date of the Program.

    5. Develop and implement an internal Good Environmental and Occupational Health and
       Safety Practices procedure for internal office remodeling activities and installation of CORS
       stations

This procedure should be applicable to the internal office remodeling activities and to the installation,
operation and maintenance of CORS stations of the Cadastre Program, which includes guidelines for the
differentiated management of waste (including construction, hazardous, electrical and electronic waste),
the proper use of personal protective equipment, the prevention of occupational risks, the control of dust,
noise and hazardous substances, and the verification of compliance with current environmental and labor
regulations, as well as mechanisms for the supervision of ANATI personnel involved in such activities. This
procedure can be developed based on the Good Environmental Practices Guide (GBPA) for Alteration and
Construction Activities of Minor Buildings (Resolution DM-0112-2025). In cases of outsourcing of the
installation of CORS stations, this procedure will be included in the corresponding bidding documents. This
procedure must be developed and approved by the Bank no later than the first six months after the effective
date of the Program.

    6. Integration of environmental, disaster risk, and cultural heritage specifications in the bidding
       documents for cadastral sweeping

Strengthen the bidding documents for the contracting of cadastral sweeps through the incorporation of: (i)
objective criteria on disaster risk that will determine that the cadastre of an untitled property will be
submitted for consultation by SINAPROC; (2) greater detail and specificity on the environmental
information to be collected on untitled properties in order to facilitate the analysis of MiAmbiente in cases

                                                                                                           60


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
that require a subsequent favorable consultation; and (vii) clear criteria for the verification of the presence
or absence of cultural heritage assets in untitled properties that will determine that the cadastre of an untitled
property will be submitted to the Ministry of Culture for consultation.

It is important to note that this data does not necessarily have to be part of the registry files.

It is also recommended that cadastral sweeping crews, as well as ANATI personnel from the area of mass
titling, receive training on the correct collection of such data by MiAmbiente, SINAPROC and MinCultura.

    7. Develop and implement an environmental and OHS training plan.

This plan will be addressed to the ANATI technical personnel directly involved in the execution of the
Program, including the personnel responsible for minor works to improve and adapt existing physical
infrastructure, the installation and operation of CORS stations, and field technicians who participate in the
cadastral sweep and titling processes. The plan must address, at a minimum, the internal protocols and/or
procedures developed and adopted by ANATI within the framework of the Program, on environmental
management and OHS issues (applicable legislation, management of hazardous and non-hazardous waste,
management of dust and noise, protection of sensitive areas, prevention of environmental impacts in works
and field work). OHS and Public Safety (identifying risks in the field, working in remote areas, using
personal protective equipment, safe driving, first aid, and emergency response) The training plan must be
designed, imparted, and coordinated by the environmental and occupational health specialist who is part of
the ANATI team, with the support of competent entities when necessary, and must be ready within the first
six months after effectiveness of the Program. Then, it must be implemented in line with the dates and
schedule provided in this Plan, with periodic updating and reinforcement sessions throughout the execution,
in order to ensure the continuous and effective application of environmental and safety measures.

    8. Development of a training program for alternative conflict resolution mechanisms .

 The objective is to strengthen institutional and territorial capacities to prevent, manage, and resolve tenure
 disputes and other conflicts associated with the cadastral process and the process of mass titling and
 collective indigenous lands, guaranteeing operational continuity, due process, and protection of rights.

 The target population should include:
 • Staff of the institution at the central level (social units, regularization and mass titling, indigenous lands
   and municipal assets, legal advice office) and regional level.
 • Field communications support personnel (field teams and contractors)
 • Local authorities (municipalities, townships) and actors of the community justice system.
 • Other key local actors: Indigenous traditional authorities, local boards, women's and community
   organizations, local ombudspersons, and existing alternate mechanisms

 The Training Program must be developed within the first six months after the effectiveness of the Program.


                                                                                                               61


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
    9. Installation and implementation of a consultation and orientation platform with municipal
       and traditional indigenous authorities for the coordination of regularization processes, mass
       titling and collective titling of indigenous lands

 The aim is to provide ANATI with a multi-channel platform (face-to-face, mixed and virtual) for
 coordination, consultation and guidance between the institution and municipal authorities and traditional
 indigenous authorities, including technical teams, to:
 • Improve the operational coordination of the regularization and mass titling processes and collective
    titling of indigenous lands.
 • Provide interactive, high-quality information to territorial actors and communities.
 • Strengthen accountability on progress, critical junctions and solution routes, avoiding conflicts and
    exclusion.

 To facilitate the dynamics of the platform, consideration should be given to developing tools and
 information materials such as: standardized and culturally adapted information kits, including easy reading
 and accessible formats, practical guides on requirements, stages and times of the processes, guidelines for
 mediation and alternative conflict resolution, as well as an inclusive approach.

 The consultation and guidance platform should be organized in the form of an operational guide within
 the first six months after the effectiveness of the Program.


    10. Integrate social planning and inclusion approaches (gender, disability, interculturality) into
        regularization and titling processes, with mandatory protocols, tools, and data fields (sex,
        disability, ethnicity, language needs) to prevent exclusion.

To institutionalize a socially inclusive cadastre, ANATI must formalize a mandatory disaggregated data
model, linked to a single protocol of differential attention and an operational guide for field teams and
windows (customer service center and regional offices), with traceability of all stages of the process until
the protocol act; This measure responds to the documented risks of exclusion of vulnerable groups in the
field stages, as well as the evidence of underreporting of persons with disabilities in care channels and the
need for institutional inclusion protocols.

This inclusive social planning approach would contain the following, at a minimum:
•   A more inclusive data management model, allowing fields in the cadastral file and SIICAR related to
    the sex of the owner and co-owner, ethnic/indigenous identity, disability status and type of support
    required, preferred language, marital situation and property regime, tenure modality, co-
    ownership/commonwealth status, among other relevant ones.
•   Single protocol for differential attention that is applicable to the field, window and protocol acts. This
    must include criteria for prioritizing attention to women, people with disabilities, single-parent
    households, indigenous peoples and the elderly; and guidelines for reasonable accommodation
    (interpreters, accessible formats, inclusive hours and points of care).


                                                                                                           62


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
•   Operational guide for field and window teams with step-by-step instructions, checklists, interview
    formats and scripts with standardized questions and filters to detect: a) free unions and co-ownership,
    b) language barriers, c) supports required by disability, d) risks of exclusion in cadastre and ownership
    processes, e) conflict situations.
•   Procedures for verification of co-ownership: documentary verification and testimonies, informed
    consents, registration of co-ownership agreements in the file and in the title, and safeguards for women
    in informal unions.
•   Intercultural guidelines that include coordination with traditional authorities, respect for internal rules
    and consultation protocols, use of community translators, and adaptation of materials and events.
•   Referral mechanisms that allow flows for cases requiring mediation, legal support, or coordination with
    MiAmbiente/MINGOB and Indigenous Authorities/Public Registry.

This action must be carried out within the first 12 months of the program's effectiveness.

    11. Design and standardize culturally and linguistically adapted participation and
        communication materials, and execute proactive information campaigns to ensure clarity on
        grievance/consultation rules, processes and mechanisms, including environmental aspects.

It is proposed to strengthen ANATI with inclusive and accessible ICTs that unify criteria and standardize
materials (guides, infographics, maps, videos and easy reading, accessible formats for PwD), articulated
with an intercultural style guide and a pipeline of translation and community validation; This addresses the
limitations of access to information and the lack of standardization identified, where the risks of cultural
adaptation are concentrated in the stages of communication and in ceremonial acts of delivery of degrees,
with impacts on the understanding of the process, institutional legitimacy and the increase in oppositions
due to lack of knowledge.

Engagement and communication materials should also include deforestation-prevention messaging in
advance of titling, for example explicit the requirement that social land use be demonstrated for a period of
5 years or more. ANATI can verify this process with the collaboration of MiAmbiente and the official
environmental cartography, including, among others, the shapefiles of the 2021 Forest Cover and Land Use
Map, land cover and land use diagnostics, the boundaries of protected areas, wetlands, and other relevant
environmental layers.

This action must be carried out within the first 6 months of the program's effectiveness.

    12. Implement a standardized system for the registration and follow-up of consultations,
        complaints, and mediations, and operational protocols for segmenting and managing
        disputed properties, enabling pre-judicial mediation and safeguarding rights and operational
        continuity.




                                                                                                            63


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
ANATI must implement a Modular Social and Conflict Management System that consolidates and traces
the cases of 311, CAU and the technical directorates (DAM, Indigenous Lands, Surveying, Public Registry),
which allows for classification, segmentation and georeferencing of queries, complaints and disputed
properties through a single repository with a control panel (statistics by type of risk, attention times, status
of case, responsible actor, mediation route), in response to the lack of consolidated statistics, the failure to
measure time and the volume of complaints of delay, as well as the recurrence of tenure conflicts in the
field and publicity stages, and intercultural disputes in indigenous territories (overlaps, changes of
authority, overlap with Protected Areas).

This action must be carried out within the first 6 months of the program's effectiveness.

5.2. Actions on the PAP

The E&S management measures indicated in the previous point will be implemented through the following
actions to be reflected in the PAP. Each of these actions will also be detailed in the POM, indicating the
responsible entities, budget and deadlines. The World Bank and GoP will oversee its implementation.




                                                                                                             64


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
       Table 3. PAP E&S actions.
                                              E&S
                Action                     management             Date                         Means of verification
                                            measure
                                                                                 At least one Environmental and Health Specialist
Strengthen E&S capacity at the
                                                           1 month after         and one Social Specialist hired or assigned to the
central level and in the regional                 1
                                                           Effective Date        central level, and focal points designated in each
administrations of ANATI
                                                                                 of ANATI's territorial administrations
Enable the ANATI systems to be fed
                                                           6 months after the    Official environmental mapping of MiAmbiente
with MiAmbiente geospatial                        2
                                                           Effective Date        included in SIICAR
information
                                                                                 The following completed protocols, plans, and
                                                                                 procedures, approved by the Bank, and under
                                                                                 implementation:
                                                                                 - Environmental management protocol to be
                                                                                 applied in the cadastre and titling processes
                                                                                 - Field security and logistics protocol for
                                                                                 cadastral and titling processes.
Develop, implement, and train on                                                 - Internal Procedure of Good Environmental
environmental, social, and health          3, 4, 5, 6, 8   6 months after the    Practices and Occupational Health and Safety.
and safety management protocols,           and 11          Effective Date        - Environmental and OHS Training Plan
plans, and procedures                                                            - Integration of environmental, disaster risk, and
                                                                                 cultural heritage specifications in the bidding
                                                                                 documents for cadastral sweeping
                                                                                 - Training program in alternative conflict
                                                                                 resolution mechanisms.
                                                                                 - Culturally and linguistically adapted
                                                                                 communication and participation materials,
                                                                                 including on environmental topics
Installation and implementation of a
                                                                                 Consultation and guidance platform with
consultation and orientation
                                                                                 municipal and traditional indigenous authorities,
platform with municipal and
                                                                                 organized through an ANATI-approved
traditional indigenous authorities;                        6 months after the
                                               9 & 12                            operating guide; and Reports of the Modular
and a standardized system for                              Effective Date
                                                                                 Social and Conflict Management System that
registration and follow-up of
                                                                                 consolidates and traceability to the cases
consultations, complaints, and
                                                                                 implemented.
mediation
Integrate social planning and
inclusion approaches (gender,                                                    Mandatory disaggregated data model, linked to
disability, interculturality) into                                               a single differential care protocol and an
regularization and titling processes,                      12 months after the   operational guide for field teams and over the
                                                 10
with mandatory protocols, tools, and                       Effective Date        counter, with traceability of all stages of the
data fields (sex, disability, ethnicity,                                         process up to the protocol act, approved by
language needs) to prevent                                                       ANATI.
exclusion.




                                                                                                                          65


                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
13. ENVIRONMENTAL, OHS, AND SOCIAL RECOMMENDATIONS


Monitor and mitigate environmental impacts of titling: While the Program is expected to have minor
direct impacts, it is important to monitor indirect environmental results. ESSA recommends establishing a
simple monitoring system in collaboration with MiAmbiente to observe changes in land use in titled areas.
For example, satellite imagery or site visits one to two years after titling can be used to verify if forested
plots remain forested or if sudden deforestation has occurred. If an increase in deforestation is detected in
titled areas (especially those that were previously untitled, public forests), the Program should coordinate
with environmental authorities to respond. Responses could include community outreach on sustainable
land use, forest law enforcement, or even revisiting the concept of the protection designation if needed.

Adopt a participatory management model that integrates the different social, economic, and territorial actors
in all phases of the processes. This approach will allow the Program not only to meet its technical objectives but
also to improve public perception, reduce costs and timelines, and strengthen territorial governance.

The environmental management protocol in the cadastre and titling procedures to be developed as
part of the Program should then be updated in the Manual of Procedures for favorable concepts of
MiAmbiente, taking into account not only the processes described in the protocol, but also current
technologies, existing databases, etc. This update should be worked on through working groups between
ANATI, and the Forestry and Environmental Information Directorates of MiAmbiente

That the cadastral sweeping crews, as well as ANATI personnel from the area of mass titling, receive
training on the correct collection of data on environmental matters, disaster risk, and cultural heritage to
be included in the bidding documents of said crews, by MiAmbiente, SINAPROC and MinCultura.

The digital elevation model to be developed as part of the program should be shared with SINAPROC
in a timely manner so that the institution can update its disaster risk map based on it.

That SINAPROC can train the personnel of the cadastral sweeping crews in aspects of health and
safety during field work in very remote areas or with specific risks.




                                                                                                               66


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
14. SUMMARY OF CONSULTATION PROCESS TO INFORM THE ESA

The consultation process to inform the ESSA was developed with the National Land Administration
Authority (ANATI) and was based on a hybrid approach that integrated two complementary methodologies:

 • Social management: systematic analysis of social risks in institutional processes, considering their
   impact on the provision of services with a social function.
 • Participatory diagnosis: Identification of needs and expectations of social and community actors,
   assessing institutional capacity in light of user realities.

The tools applied included:

 • Maps of service processes with a social function (regularization and mass titling; adjudication of
   indigenous collective lands).
 • Maps of institutional actors, in accordance with Law 59 of 2010 and the organizational structure of
   ANATI.
 • Semi-structured interviews with key institutional actors.
 • Documentary analysis of censuses, statistics, social participation reports, and Bicentennial Pact
   databases.

This methodological design allowed a triangulation of sources (institutional, community and documentary),
guaranteeing validity and relevance of the findings. (Annex 10)

Risks are grouped into three main categories:
 • Administrative: delays in the resolution of procedures, lack of standardization, and weak institutional
    capacities.
 • Communicational: limited access to information, cultural and linguistic barriers, absence of
    standardized messages.
 • Territorial and social: exclusion of vulnerable groups, land tenure conflicts, limitations in mediation
    mechanisms, environmental risks in adjudication processes.

Depending on their frequency and concentration, the most recurrent risk is delays in procedural steps, which
are present in almost all technical and legal stages. The risks of access to information and cultural adaptation
are concentrated in the stages of communication and delivery of degrees. The risks of territorial conflicts
and exclusion of vulnerable groups appear in the phases of cadastral survey, visual inspection and publicity
of processes.

The map of institutional actors shows an interdependent system with critical functions:

 • Public Relations Office: A channel for communication with citizens, with progress in terms of
   dissemination, but challenges in terms of standardization and cultural coverage.


                                                                                                             67


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
 • Office of Human Resources (Training and Equal Opportunities): strategic role in strengthening
   technical and social capacities, inclusion and gender equity.
 • National Directorates for Titling and Regularization, Massive Allotment, and Indigenous Lands and
   Municipal Property: responsible for territorial processes, with high risk of delays and community
   conflicts.
 • Regional Administrations and CAU: axes of citizen attention, with the need for a greater territorial
   presence and inclusive protocols.

The interviews reveal common concerns: slow procedures, lack of standardization, cultural communication
gaps, insufficient mediation mechanisms, and weaknesses in social inclusion.

The consultation process concluded that:

 • ANATI's social land administration system has made significant progress in terms of communication,
   digitalization, and interinstitutional coordination, but maintains persistent structural risks.
 • The delay in formalities is the main factor of social uncertainty, affecting citizen confidence and
   institutional legitimacy.
 • The risks of access to information and cultural adaptation limit the effective participation of indigenous
   and rural communities and vulnerable groups.
 • The management of territorial conflicts requires social capacity building and mediation protocols.
 • Social and labor inclusion is advancing, but it still lacks consolidated institutional policies on disability,
   gender and interculturality.

Based on the conclusions of the analysis, the following actions are suggested for each area:

Administrative Management
 • Standardize technical and legal processes with national manuals and protocols.
 • Digitize and trace files to guarantee transparency and reduce time.
 • Establish programmatic milestones of the National Cadastre Program and disseminate them publicly.

Communication and Information
   • Consolidate messages and information materials through a national information center.
   • Tailor content for diverse audiences (youth, indigenous, rural) in accessible formats.
   • National awareness campaign on the benefits of titling and cadastre.

Inclusion and Training
    • Strengthen training in mediation and conflict management for field personnel.
    • Inclusive care protocols for persons with disabilities and vulnerable groups.
    • Institutional gender equity program with monitoring indicators
    • Formal study of training needs by region and specialty.



                                                                                                              68


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
Territorial Governance
    • Greater coordination with traditional and municipal authorities in awarding contracts.
    • Communication protocols in sensitive areas with strategic projects.
    • Permanent interdisciplinary team to implement the Inclusion Policy.

In summary, the consultation process confirms that ANATI has a social management system under
construction, with solid foundations in communication and coordination, but with critical gaps in
administrative efficiency, cultural and social inclusion, and conflict resolution. The implementation of the
Multipurpose Cadastre System and the Program-for-Results represent a strategic opportunity to: modernize
institutional management, reduce recurring social risks, strengthen citizen trust, and guarantee a robust and
equitable social approach to land administration.




                                                                                                          69


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
15. REFERENCES

  •   National Land Administration Authority (ANATI). 2024. Organization and Functions Manual.
      Available at: https://www.anati.gob.pa/Transparencia/organigrama/MANUAL-ORG-FUNC.pdf
  •   Ministry of the Environment. Resolution No. DM-0148-2022 of Panama. Forest Cover and Land
      Use Map 2021. Available at: https://www.sala-seem.org/files/79/Forestal/646/Resolucion-No-
      DM-0148-2022-Mapa-de-Cobertura-Boscosa-y-Uso-de-Suelo-2021-.pdf
  •   Ministry of the Environment. 2024. Forests and Other Woodlands Diagnostic 2023. Available at:
      https://sinia.gob.pa/el-diagnostico-de-cobertura-de-bosques-y-otras-tierras-boscosas-2023/
  •   Ministry of Economy and Finance of Panama. Government Strategic Plan 2025-2029.
  •   Institute of Statistics and Census of Panama. Population and Housing Census decade 2020. Year
      2023
  •   Institute of Statistics and Census of Panama. Agricultural Census. Year 2024
  •   National Land Administration Authority (ANATI). Coverage of cadastral areas in the national
      territory. Year 2025.
  •   National Land Administration Authority (ANATI). Resolution No. ADMG-391 of September 16,
      2014, approving the new forms and documents for the regularization and mass titling processes of
      lands executed by the State; and other provisions are issued.
  •   National Land Administration Authority (ANATI). Directorate of Indigenous Lands and Municipal
      Assets. Statistics on comarcas constituted, collective lands registered, collective lands requested
      (in process) and levels of progress of the files of collective lands requested. Year 2025.
  •   World Bank. 2025. Bank Directive Program for Results Financing.
  •   World Bank. 2024. Bank Policy Program for Results Financing.
  •   World Bank. 2024. Bank Guidance Program-for-Results Financing: Environmental and Social
      Systems




                                                                                                      70


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
16. ANNEXES

Annex 1. ESSA consultation with focus groups.
Annex 2. Field technical inspection report and Land Use and Management Plan (Environmental Sheet).
Annex 3. Land Regularization and Mass Titling Process.
Annex 4. Request for Mediation Service.
Annex 5. Secretarial Report by Conflict.
Annex 6. Ruling by reason of conflict.
Annex 7. Cadastral file.
Annex 8. Coverage map of cadastral areas in the national territory. Year 2025.
Annex 9. Procedure for Awarding Collective Ownership of Lands Traditionally Occupied by Indigenous
          Peoples.
Annex 10. Methodology and systematization of the consultation to inform and prepare the ESSA




                                                                                               71


                                                                                              Official Use Only
Annex 1. ESSA consultation with focus groups.

                              Methodological and Systematization Report

1. Methodological approach to the consultation
The consultation took place as a structured process of technical feedback and participatory validation of the
preliminary findings of the ESSA with focus groups, following the World Bank standards for Program-for-
Results (PforR). The process was based on two principles: (i) transparency and traceability of the
information shared, and (ii) informed participation of key actors with direct roles in the implementation or
supervision of the Program, organized through two focus groups.

1.1. Methodological design
It was carried out through two consultation sessions differentiated by stakeholders, allowing delving into
risks and specific measures according to the field of specialty:

      o Session 1: Focus group of actors linked to Indigenous Peoples.
      o Session 2: Focus group of actors linked to environmental management, disaster risks, local
        governments, customer service, administrative management and equalization of opportunities.

The tool applied consisted of a standardized guide presentation, used in both sessions, which included:

      o   Description of the PforR and its activities.
      o   ESSA objectives and principles.
      o   Benefits, risks, and proposed preliminary steps.
      o   Guiding questions for discussion
      o   Open dialogue space for technical inputs

Verbal informed consent was requested, ensuring voluntary participation and appropriate use of
information.

The consultations lasted an average of three hours per session and were carried out in the morning.

A systematic record of contributions was applied, classifying interventions by theme, institution, and
program team response.


2. Engagement analysis
The consultations were held with general participation of 20 people out of 37 (54%).

      o Session 1 (Indigenous Peoples): 9 people convened; 6 actually participated, leaving absent the
        actors requesting collective titling, who are also indigenous authorities.
      o Session 2 (Environmental Management, Disaster Risk Management, Territorial Governance): 28
        people convened; 14 participated.



                                                                                                          72


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
The participants were characterized by their institutional diversity (Ministries of Government and
Environment, SINAPROC, AMUPA, National Decentralization Authority and ANATI); Balanced gender
representation, with significant representation of women in technical and managerial roles; and indigenous
ethnic representation in the first session.

Participation was technically relevant, with actors with direct knowledge of the cadastre process, titling,
environmental management, disaster risk, and territorial governance. This allowed to obtain highly relevant
inputs for the adjustment of the ESSA.

In the absence of the representatives of the applicants for collective titling with the roles of indigenous
authorities, an additional consultation session will be convened with the aim of collecting the contributions
of these representatives in a direct and participatory manner, ensuring that their contributions are
substantively integrated into the ESSA. The results of this process will be incorporated into the adjusted
ESSA prior to PforR approval.

3. Key Elements of the Environmental and Social Assessment


                                          Expected benefits
                      Social                                         Environmental
 Improved legal security and equitable access to     Better control of urban           expansion     and
 land.                                               protection of sensitive areas.
 Integration of cadastral and registry information   Reduction of      pressure       on   forests   and
 for territorial planning.                           watersheds.
 Strengthening municipal         capacities   and
                                                     Strengthening deforestation monitoring.
 indigenous territories.
                                                     Identification of areas vulnerable to floods and
 Reduced transaction costs and response times.
                                                     landslides.
 Transparency     through       communication
                                                     Energy efficiency through digitalization.
 campaigns and consultation platforms.


                                           Identified Risks
                      Social                                     Environmental & OHS
 Reactivation of latent conflicts over boundaries    Electrical and electronic waste due to
 and rights.                                         technological modernization.
 Exclusion of vulnerable groups in surveys and       Minor impacts from works in CORS offices and
 titling.                                            stations.
 Limited access to information due to lack of        Vegetation and fauna being affected by the
 accessible mechanisms                               opening of trails.
                                                     Titling in sensitive areas that could induce
 Delays in procedures that generate tensions.
                                                     deforestation

                                                                                                           73


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
       Limited institutional capacity to manage           Physical, electrical, ergonomic, and road safety
       complaints and mediations.                         risks in the field.


                                       Proposed preliminary measures
                              Social                               Environmental & OHS
       Alternative Conflict Resolution (ADR) training Institutional strengthening in ANATI with E&S
       program.                                        personnel.
       Platform for consultation and coordination with Environmental management and OHS protocols
       municipalities and indigenous authorities.      for cadastre and titling.
       Standardized system for recording grievances
                                                       ANATI–MiAmbiente Coordination.
       and mediations.
       Integration of inclusion approaches (gender,
                                                       Training in risk prevention.
       disability, interculturality).


     4. Analysis of contributions
     The recording of contributions made it possible to analyze them by means of qualitative coding aimed at
     identifying predominant emotional patterns associated with the participants' experience with the activities
     proposed by the Program-for-Results. Three axes of feeling were applied: Trust/Distrust,
     Satisfaction/Dissatisfaction, and Hope/Frustration.

     Each contribution was interpreted considering its explicit content, the institutional context and the nature
     of the contribution expressed.

     Session 1. Actors linked to Indigenous Peoples and Land Administration

     Topic                Contribution               Plaintiff       Sentiment        Qualitative assessment

                  They request detailed clarity Vice Ministry Distrust            / Strategic contribution that
                  on the activities of the of Indigenous Caution                    demonstrates the need to
                  Program        applied       to Affairs                           strengthen institutional
                  indigenous territories to                                         communication          and
Scope of the
                  avoid misinformation and                                          adjust messages to avoid
PforR in
                  unrealistic      expectations                                     expectations that are not
indigenous
                  among               traditional                                   aligned with the real
territories
                  authorities. They express                                         scope of the Program.
                  concern that the PforR will
                  resolve all collective titling
                  applications in the near term.

Existing          They describe multiple Vice Ministry Frustration                / Critical   input     that
territorial       active conflicts: invasions by of Indigenous Caution              underscores the urgency
conflicts         third parties, lack of physical                                   of         strengthening
                  delimitation, overlapping of                                      interagency coordination

                                                                                                               74


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                  private      titles    within Affairs   –                       and conflict resolution
                  collective territories. They Legal Team                         mechanisms to avoid
                  point out that these conflicts                                  escalation      during
                  could intensify during the                                      implementation.
                  cadastral survey.

                  They express an expectation Vice Ministry Hope                  Constructive contribution
                  that the Program will of Indigenous                             that     validates      the
                  contribute to advancing the Affairs                             relevance of the pilot and
Collective        many pending applications                                       its potential to improve
titling           for collective titling. They                                    structural processes of
                  recognize the value of the                                      collective titling.
                  pilot, but expect tangible
                  results.

                  They request that ANATI's Vice Ministry Confidence           / Contribution aimed at
                  care and service protocols of Indigenous Hope                  strengthening inclusion
Service           incorporate         indigenous Affairs                         and improving the quality
protocols         participation     to    ensure                                 of the public service with
                  cultural     relevance     and                                 an intercultural approach.
                  accessibility.

                  They see value in developing Vice Ministry Hope                 This          contribution
                  the system, but emphasize of Indigenous                         reinforces the importance
Indigenous
                  that its usefulness will Affairs                                of     co-creation    and
Land
                  depend      on      ongoing                                     community appropriation
Information
                  engagement and effective                                        to      guarantee      the
System
                  communication         during                                    sustainability of the
                  design.                                                         system.

                  They point out that the Vice Ministry Caution / Mild            This contribution shows
                  mechanisms must guarantee of Indigenous Dissatisfaction         the need to strengthen the
Consultation
                  effective     access      for Affairs                           modular system of social
and Grievance
                  indigenous peoples, avoiding                                    management and ensure
Mechanisms
                  administrative obstacles that                                   cultural relevance in the
                  generate conflicts.                                             attention of cases.

                  They reaffirm that ANATI        Directorate of Conditional      A    contribution     that
Compliance
                  must strictly comply with       Indigenous     trust            underlines the importance
with collective
                  current regulations and avoid   Lands                           of legal certainty and
titling
                  incorporating requirements      (ANATI)                         procedural transparency.
regulations
                  not provided for in the law.




                                                                                                           75


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
      Session 2. Actors linked to Environmental Management, Disaster Risk Management, Territorial
      Governance, and Land Administration

     Topic               Contribution                Plaintiff        Sentiment      Qualitative assessment

Coordination      They describe the current      MiAmbiente      – Mild            Technical input that
for               process of filling out         Forest            Dissatisfaction identifies opportunities
environmental     environmental files and        Management        / Caution       for            operational
fact sheets       point out that prior           Technicians                       improvement            and
                  coordination           (with                                     interinstitutional
                  MiAmbiente      technicians                                      coordination.
                  within the UTOs) was a
                  good experience. They
                  identify improving response
                  times as an opportunity.

Disaster risk     They indicate that risk SINAPROC               – Caution           This         contribution
management        assessment in cadastral Technical                                  reinforces the need to
                  sweeps can be strengthened.                                        integrate risk criteria in
                  They point to existing, but                                        titling and territorial
                  insufficient, coordination.                                        planning decisions.

Municipal use of They consult on the AMUPA                       – Hope              Contribution       that
cadastral        technological    capacities Technical                               strengthens the multi-
information      needed for municipalities to                                        purpose approach and
                 access the system. They                                             the articulation with
                 stress the importance of                                            local governments.
                 coordinating with local
                 boards and improving
                 information dissemination.

Decentralization They point out that cadastral   National          Trust             Contribution         that
and use of       information will speed up       Decentralization                    validates             the
resources        municipal projects and          Authority       –                   institutional benefit of
                 improve accountability.         Advisor                             the Program and its
                                                                                     impact       on     local
                                                                                     management.

Update for the    They warn that the creation AMUPA and the Caution                  This        contribution
creation of new   of new townships generates Decentralization                        highlights            the
townships         overlaps of farms that must Authority                              importance of robust
                  be updated appropriately.                                          cartographic standards
                                                                                     to prevent conflicts.



                                                                                                             76


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
Discarding        They confirm that there is a    ANATI          – Trust                Contribution       that
Assets            heritage    asset   manual      Administration                        ensures      regulatory
                  applicable to the PforR for     and      Finance                      compliance and reduces
                  the disposal of obsolete        Directorate                           environmental     risks
                  equipment.                                                            associated with waste
                                                                                        management.



     In summary, session 1 showed a predominance of hope about the expected results of the PforR, especially
     with respect to the pilot to improve collective titling and develop the information system; However, caution
     arises in areas of territorial conflicts, expectations regarding the scope of the program, and the relevance of
     the grievance mechanism. In session 2, confidence prevailed, especially in the potential of the multi-purpose
     nature of the Cadastre System and the recognition of institutional coordination; However, concern is
     recurrent in operational processes that require improvement.

     5. Value added of the consultation for the strengthening of the ESSA
     The consultation provided substantive inputs that reinforce the technical and operational robustness of the
     ESSA, without modifying the scope of the Program, but deepening in critical areas for risk management
     and the maximization of benefits.

     Main enrichment inputs of the ESSA

         •    Clarification of the scope of the PforR in indigenous territories, reducing risks of misinformation
              and strengthening cultural relevance.
          • Importance of interinstitutional coordination (ANATI–MiAmbiente–SINAPROC–Municipalities)
              for managing conflicts, environmental risks, and disaster risks.
          • Need to strengthen participation, consultation, and grievance mechanisms, especially for
              indigenous peoples and vulnerable groups.
          • Importance of the multipurpose cadastral information system as a tool for planning, conflict
              prevention and territorial management.
          • Operational recommendations for improving response times, quality of information, and
              coordination with local governments.
          • Validate preliminary measures and proposals for strengthening the PAP.
     The consultation confirms that the risks identified in the ESSA are relevant and that the proposed measures
     are adequate, but further coordination and participation mechanisms are required, especially in indigenous
     territories and municipalities. The contributions received strengthen the social and environmental viability
     of the Program, and consolidate a preventive and comprehensive risk management approach.




                                                                                                                 77


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
Annex 2. Field technical inspection report and Land Use and Management Plan (Environmental Sheet).




                                                                                                78


                                                                                               Official Use Only
79


Official Use Only
80


Official Use Only
Annex 3. Land Regularization and Mass Titling Process.




                                                         81


                                                         Official Use Only
82


Official Use Only
83


Official Use Only
84


Official Use Only
85


Official Use Only
Annex 4. Request for Mediation Service.




                                          86


                                          Official Use Only
Annex 5. Secretarial Report by Conflict




                    NATIONAL DIRECTORATE OF MASSIVE AWARDING
                     TECHNICAL OPERATING UNIT OF ____________



                                                                   Cadastral ID No.




                                            RT-16
                           SECRETARIAL REPORT BY CONCLICTO

                                                                    Date of Report:
                                                        Day          Month                Year




Mr. Director, I hereby inform you that in the file that corresponds to property No. _______, located
at:

       Province                 District               Township             Populated location




THE LORD(S):

             First name                             Last Name                       Ced./Pas.




He                 can                     be                reached              at
____________________________________________________________________________
__________, and can be reached at the telephone number _________________________,

                                                                                                 87


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
has filed a Brief of Opposition (visible on page ____) to the application for award in the name
of:

             First name                             Last Name                  Ced./Pas.




accompanied by the following documents according to which it affirms that it maintains better
rights regarding possession over the aforementioned property:


 does not present a document. If you submit document(s):




The facts explaining the conflict are as follows:


 does not explain. does explain:




                                                                                            88


                                                                                           Official Use Only
Once the statement of opposition had been formalized, the content of the opposition was brought
to the attention of the opposing party, with the following reply:


none.                 answers as follows:




Having reviewed the evidentiary material and the facts and claims contained in the parties'
submissions, we consider that the conflict has the following connotation:

     It is aimed at attacking the competence of this entity, since the existence of a previously
      constituted property title (overlapping with private property) is denounced.

     Possession is disputed between the parties in terms of one of the boundaries (partial
      overlap).

     Possession is disputed between the parties with respect to the entire land (complete
      overlap).

     The disregard or closure of an easement ( servant property) is disputed.

     the disregard or closure of a public easement is discussed.

     It refers to facts that do not have to do with the ownership or possession of the property
      of the parties, but to completely different aspects.

     relates to:


Taking into account that the conflict is not about the complaint of overlapping with private property,
they were offered mediation or conciliation services. Faced with this proposition:

     The parties agreed to submit the dispute to alternative methods of dispute resolution, but
      they did not reach an agreement.

     The parties did not agree to submit the conflict to alternative dispute resolution methods.


                                                                                                   89


                                                                                                  Official Use Only
Given that a satisfactory agreement was not reached between the parties, we consider that the
appropriate thing to do is to declare the property in conflict, verify the adjudicability of the property
and, if appropriate, refer the file to the administration of justice.

Finally, we would like to inform you that the aforementioned opposition to the award:

                                                                    Day         Month          Year

 is extemporaneous,         because it was formalized on:
                                                                    Day         Month          Year

                             the term expiring on:
                                                                    Day         Month          Year

is in term,                because it was formalized on:

In this sense, we send this secretarial report so that it may determine what is appropriate by
means of an Order.




                                                                        (Name)
                                                              Attorney, Legal Department




                                                                                                      90


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Annex 6. Providence in case of conflict.




                   NATIONAL DIRECTORATE OF MASSIVE AWARDING
                REGIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTORATE OF __________



                                                                  Cadastral ID No.




                                            RT-17
                                      RULING Nº _________
         BY REASON OF CONFLICT OVER THE POSSESSION OF THE PROPERTY

                                                      Day           Month               Year
                                     Date of Order:


                                            WHEREAS:


That by means of a Secretarial Report dated:
                    Day               Month               Year



of the Legal Department, this entity was informed about the existence of a conflict with respect to
property No. _______, located at:
       Province                  District              Township            Populated location



whose Requester(s) are responding to:
             Name(s)                           Last Name(s)                  Cesd No. / Pas.




                                                                                                91


                                                                                               Official Use Only
That the Brief of Opposition (visible on page ____) to the application for award was formalized
by:

             First name                            Last Name                     Ced./Pas.




That the facts on which the opposition is based consist of:




That after examining the evidentiary material and the facts and claim contained in the statement
of opposition, it is concluded that the conflict has the following connotation:


                 Possession is disputed between the parties, in terms of one of the
                  boundaries (partial overlap).

                 Possession is disputed between the parties, with respect to the
                  entire land (complete overlap).

                 The disregard or closure of an easement ( servant property) is
                  disputed.

                 the disregard or closure of a public easement is discussed.

                 It refers to facts that do not have to do with the ownership or
                  possession of the property of the parties, but to completely
                  different aspects.

                 relates to:



                                                                                             92


                                                                                             Official Use Only
That in accordance with the provisions of numeral 12 of Article 12 of Executive Decree No. 228
of September 27, 2006 (amended by Executive Decree No. 45 of June 7, 2010), mediation or
conciliation services were offered to the parties, to which:

                  The parties agreed to submit the dispute to alternative methods of
                   dispute resolution, but they did not reach an agreement.

                  The parties did not agree to submit the conflict to alternative
                   dispute resolution methods.

That due to the lack of a satisfactory agreement between the parties, the adjudicability of the
property was verified, that is, to determine the competence of this institution to award the property
after verifying technical and legal aspects that allow to ensure (at the highest level of probability)
that said property is located within national lands (national vacant land or patrimonial property of
the Nation); is not reserved for government or municipal development projects; has the approval
or favorable concept of public institutions consulted; that does not overlap with previously
constituted private property or with indigenous territory; that one or both parties have the profile
required by law and regulations to be the eventual awardee; and that it has been possible to
determine the approximate or certain area that really has vestiges of possession.
That in view of the persistence of the conflict and the provisions of the third paragraph of Article
66 of Law No. 59 of October 8, 2010, what is appropriate is to declare the property in conflict and
send the file to the administration of justice so that it may resolve the claims of the parties and the
rest of the records of the file.

In light of the foregoing,

                                      RESOLVES as follows:

FIRST. TO DECLARE in conflict property No. ____________, located at:

        Province                 District                Township             Populated location




with an area of ________________________ and within the following preliminary boundaries:


 North

 South

 This

 West


                                                                                                    93


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
whose Applicant(s) is(are):



             Name(s)                          Last Name(s)                    Cesd No. / Pas.




It has been opposed by:

             First name                            Last Name                       Ced./Pas.




SECOND. ORDER that the file be referred to the administration of justice so that it may resolve
the conflict between:

                  Applicant(s)                                      Opponent(s)




THIRD. TO STATE that this Ruling will enter into force as of its signature.

LEGAL BASIS: Article 12(12) of Executive Decree No. 228 of September 27, 2006 (amended by
Executive Decree No. 45 of June 7, 2010); and Article 66 of Law No. 59 of October 8, 2010.

BE NOTIFIED AND COMPLIED WITH.




                                                                   (Name)
                                                        Regional Administrative Director




                                                                                                94


                                                                                                Official Use Only
Annex 7. Cadastral file.




                           95


                           Official Use Only
96


Official Use Only
Annex 8. Coverage map of cadastral areas in the national territory. Year 2025.




                                                                                 97


                                                                                 Official Use Only
Annex 9. Procedure for Awarding Collective Ownership of Lands Traditionally Occupied by
         Indigenous Peoples.




                                                                                    98


                                                                                    Official Use Only
99


Official Use Only
100


Official Use Only
101


Official Use Only
Annex 10. Methodology and systematization of consultation to inform ESSA preparation


The consultation process was carried out using a hybrid approach combining social management and
participatory diagnosis methodologies.

Social management consisted of applying a systematic approach to identify social risks and their effects
on the provision of services with a social function, according to the "process maps" operationalized by
ANATI. Each stage of the processes was reviewed, from risk identification to current treatment and
institutional capacities were analyzed to define measures to strengthen their management.

The participatory diagnostic assessment provided the strategy of identifying the needs of the context
where services are planned and executed, taking into account the social dimension, and analyzing whether
the response capacity matches the realities of the users.

The first step was the following tools:

    •   Process map of services with a social function: (i) regularization and mass titling of lands and (ii)
        adjudication of collective land ownership by indigenous peoples. Other key processes for
        communication, HR training, consultation and complaints, and social inclusion did not have
        processes in place. Its application allows for the identification of social risks.
    •   Map of institutional actors of the social function, by role and responsibilities established in Law 59
        of October 8, 2010, which created ANATI, and its organizational structure and functions manual.
        The institutional administrative units in the social sphere to be consulted are identified in order to
        identify the needs and expectations of all those involved.


Subsequently, with the information generated, the following instruments were applied for social
consultation, combining key institutional actors and citizen contributions from participatory processes:

    •   Semi-structured interview applied to mapped institutional actors in the social sphere (management
        and technical) to deepen perceptions and concerns about social risks and the measures for their
        treatment.
    •   Documentary analysis: review of process maps, statistics of relevant information (INEC censuses),
        administrative data from ANATI, and social participation reports that address the issue of land
        administration. The database of the Bicentennial Pact (2021), recognized as the most extensive
        participatory process ever carried out in Panama, with a bottom-up approach, was consulted, where
        the AGORA platform of the United Nations Development Programme and the results of the
        participatory processes between national government authorities and traditional indigenous women
        were used.


The information collected was systematized and analyzed to present the key issues, risks identified, and
actions for improvement.



                                                                                                          102


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
1. Process map of services with a social function

     •   Regularization and mass titling of lands (See Annex on Process Flow)
          Process / Phase                        Type of Process                       Social risk
 A1. Preparatory Acts                Declaratory / Investigative           Delay in Pipeline Selection and
                                                                           During Processing
 A2. Disclosure                      Communication (general)               Limited access to information –
                                                                           cultural adaptation
 A3. Initial Notification            Communication (individual)            Limited access to information –
                                                                           cultural adaptation
 A4. Cadastre survey                 Technical / Declaratory               Exclusion of vulnerable groups from
                                                                           owning land
                                                                           Conflict over disputed land tenure
                                                                           Limitations to Mediation
                                                                           Delay in resolving paperwork
 A5. Public pre-exposure             Technical                             Delay in resolving paperwork
 A6. Public Exposure                 Communication/Statement/Technical     Cultural Adaptation
                                                                           Exclusion of vulnerable groups from
                                                                           owning land
 A7.        Overall     Technical    Technical                             Delay in resolving paperwork
 Classification
 A8. Approval of Drawings            Technical                             Delay in resolving paperwork
 A9. File review                     Technical                             Delay in resolving paperwork
 A10. Advertising and Summons        Communication (general)               Limited access to information –
                                                                           cultural adaptation
                                                                           Conflict over disputed land tenure
                                                                           Limitations to Mediation
                                                                           Delay in resolving paperwork
 A11. Mass Award                     Technical / Legal                     Delay in resolving paperwork
 A12. Mass registration              Legal                                 Delay in resolving paperwork


In summary, the most frequent risk is the delay in the resolution of procedures, which is present in almost
all technical and legal stages; the risks related to access to information and cultural adaptation appear in the
stages of communication, both general and individual; and the risks of exclusion of vulnerable groups,
tenure conflicts and limitations on mediation are concentrated in the stages of territorial work and
community interaction. Below is a summary of the social risks and their frequency of occurrence:




                                                                                                            103


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                                                                    Frequency
                                                                                                    Stages where it
       Social risk                           Short Description                          of
                                                                                                       appears
                                                                                    occurrence
Delay in the resolution of                                                                          A1, A4, A5, A7,
                              Administrative delays that affect the continuity of
formalities / selection for                                                             8            A8, A9, A10,
                              the process and generate social uncertainty
processing                                                                                            A11, A12
                              Linguistic, cultural, or technological barriers to
Limited    access   to
                              understanding or accessing process information                         A2, A3, A6,
information – cultural                                                                  5
                              Need to adapt the process to local practices,                             A10
adaptation
                              languages, or sociocultural dynamics.
                              Risk that certain groups (indigenous, women,
Exclusion of vulnerable
                              elderly, internal migrants) will be left out of the       2               A4, A6
groups from owning land
                              process
Conflict over disputed land   Tensions or disputes between local actors over
                                                                                        2              A4, A10
tenure                        possession or ownership rights.
                              Lack of effective mechanisms to resolve conflicts
Limitations to Mediation                                                                2              A4, A10
                              or disagreements between actors.



   •    Awarding of collective land ownership by indigenous peoples (See Annex on Process Flow)
          Process / Phase                     Type of Process                        Social risk
A1. Application for collective land      Right of petition            Limited access to information – cultural
titling                                                               adaptation

A2. Intake and formal verification of    Technical                    Delay in resolving paperwork
application
A3. Publication of Notice of Initial     Communication (general)      Limited access to information – cultural
Notice                                                                adaptation
A4. Technical and ocular inspection      Technical/Communication      Delay in resolving paperwork
                                         (Individual)                 Conflict over disputed land tenure

A5. Assessment of Measurement            Technical                    Delay in resolving paperwork
                                                                      Conflict over disputed land tenure
A6. Traditional Occupancy Report         Technical                    Delay in resolving paperwork
A7. Technical Evaluation of Mi           Technical                    Delay in resolution/refusal
Ambiente (approval)
A8. Approval of sustainable use plan     Technical                    Delay in resolution/refusal

A9. Obtaining water resources on the     Technical                    Delay in resolving paperwork
plane (Mi Ambiente)
A10. Approval and Recording of           Technical                    Delay in resolving paperwork
Drawings
A11. Approval of application             Legal                        Delay in resolving paperwork




                                                                                                                 104


                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
            Process / Phase                     Type of Process                         Social risk
 A12. Publication of edict approving       Communication                 Delay in resolving paperwork
 application                                                             Conflict over disputed land tenure
 A13. Collective land adjudication         Legal                         Delay in resolving paperwork
 decision
 A14. Notification of resolution           Communication                 Delay in resolving paperwork
 A15. Registration of resolution           Legal                         Delay in resolving paperwork
 A16. Delivery of title                    Protocol                      Cultural Adaptation


In summary, the dominant risk is the delay in the resolution of procedures, which is present in almost all
the technical and legal stages of the process, the risks of access to information and cultural adaptation are
concentrated in the communication stages and in the final delivery of the title, tenure conflicts appear at
key moments of territorial verification and in the advertising phase, and environmental assessments
introduce additional risks of delay or denial, relevant for process planning. Below is the consolidated list
of social risks and their frequency of occurrence.

                                                                                Frequency
                                                                                                 Stages where it
       Social risk                         Short Description                        of
                                                                                                    appears
                                                                                occurrence

                              Administrative delays affecting process                          A2, A4, A5, A6, A7,
 Delay   in     resolving
                              continuity and creating uncertainty for              12           A8, A9, A10, A11,
 paperwork
                              communities                                                      A12, A13, A14, A15

 Limited    access   to
                              Cultural, linguistic, or technological barriers
 information – cultural                                                             3             A1, A3, A10
                              to understanding the process.
 adaptation

 Cultural       adaptation    Need to adapt the final delivery to cultural
                                                                                    1                   A16
 (protocol act)               practices and expectations of the community.

 Conflict over disputed       Tensions between local actors over possession
                                                                                    3             A4, A5, A12
 land tenure                  or ownership rights.

 Delay/Denial         for     Risk of delays or rejection in environmental
                                                                                    2                 A7, A8
 Technical Evaluation         technical stages.




2. Map of institutional actors of the social function

The National Land Administration Authority (ANATI) articulates a set of administrative units that perform
essential functions to guarantee legal security, regularization of land tenure, and citizen service throughout
the national territory. These units form an interdependent institutional system that allows for the execution
of land policies with a social, territorial, and community approach.

                                                                                                                   105


                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
The Public Relations Office acts as the main channel of communication with citizens, managing
complaints, inquiries and the dissemination of institutional information. The Office of Legal Advice
ensures the correct interpretation and application of the legal framework, providing regulatory support to
all areas and developing key legal instruments for land management.

The Institutional Human Resources Office supports internal capabilities through training, well-being,
and inclusion processes, ensuring a competent technical team aligned with institutional objectives. For its
part, the User Service Center (CAU) constitutes the operational axis of citizen service, receiving and
managing requests, complaints and queries, including the administration of the 311 system.

The Regional Administrations represent ANATI in the territory, implementing land policies and cadastral
modernization in ten provinces, with permanent coordination with the central headquarters and expansion
of the CAU according to demand. The National Directorate of Massive Adjudication leads the
regularization and mass titling processes, engaging directly with communities and municipalities to
improve access to land tenure.

Finally, the National Directorate of Indigenous Lands and Municipal Property manages the
adjudication of indigenous collective lands and the transfers of national lands to municipalities, maintaining
bilateral communication with territorial and local authorities.

Together, these actors form an institutional structure that allows ANATI to fulfill its social mandate, seeking
to strengthen territorial governance and guarantee equitable access to land ownership and possession.



3. Semi-structured interview applied to institutional actors in the social sphere

The information gathered in the interviews has been systematized; based on previously identified social
risks and recommended measures to address them.




     •   Office of Public Affairs

  Social Risks         Perceptions and concerns                Current Actions                 Proposed Actions
 Limited access • The population is not always aware      • Partnerships with SERTV • Standardize         messages   and
 to information     of the National Multi-Purpose           and media for weekly         informational materials at the
 and     cultural   Cadastre Program.                       dissemination.               national level.
 adaptation       • There are cultural, technological,    • Communiqués coordinated • Create an information center to
                    and linguistic divides that make it     with      the   Presidency   unify criteria and content.
                    difficult to understand the             (institutional Wednesdays, • National campaign from 2026
                    processes.                              presidential Thursdays).     on benefits of cadastre and
                                                                                         titling.

                                                                                                                     106


                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
 Social Risks         Perceptions and concerns                  Current Actions                     Proposed Actions
                 • Institutional communication had        • Use of social networks,         • Technical and social training of
                   lost identity and coherence and the      call center and 311 system        staff to improve communication
                   current administration is restoring      for consultations.                with communities.
                   it; Regions generate their own         • Restructuring of messages       • External accompaniment in
                   content without standardization.         and     development      of       advertising and marketing.
                 • Information does not always reach        information packages with       • Generate educational content on
                   indigenous or rural communities,         HR.                               key concepts of the cadastre.
                   where there are additional risks due   • Appointments           and      • Tailor messages to young and
                   to other projects.                       consultations via the web.        diverse audiences.
                 • Citizenship is unaware of all the      • Media coverage of title
                   benefits of title and possessory         ceremonies             and
                   rights.                                  community events.
                                                          • Internal     analysis    of
                                                            comments and reactions on
                                                            networks.

Delay        in • Slow processes owing to lack of         • Interinstitutional              • Standardize processes and unify
resolving         standardization,          divergence      coordination promoted by          technical criteria.
paperwork         between        directorates,     and      the General Administrator.      • Strengthen the digitization and
                  dependence on other institutions        • Weekly meetings between           traceability of files.
                  (Registro Público, MiAmbiente,            heads of management.            • Set Program milestones and
                  ACP).                                   • Prioritize old procedures to      disseminate them to build trust.
                • Extremely old cases (up to 60             close gaps.                     • Improve the territorial planning
                  years) that generate social             • Progressive digitalization        of massive allocations.
                  frustration.                              and technical-operational       • Train staff in technology and
                • Lack of clear programming on              strengthening       (IGTG,        policy tools.
                  where the massive degrees will be         CORPS antennas).                • Create transparent prioritization
                  carried out.                            • Exchange of information           mechanisms known to the
                • Need for updated inventories of           with the Public Registry.         public.
                  files.
Conflicts over • Conflicts in traditionally occupied      • Agreements with local           • Strengthen mediation and early
land     tenure   areas, infrastructure projects, or        authorities to coordinate         conflict resolution mechanisms.
disputes          overlapping rights.                       mass awards.                    • Greater      coordination   with
                • Specific risks in indigenous            • Direct communication at           traditional     and     municipal
                  territories and areas with strategic      title     deliveries    and       authorities.
                  projects (train, cable car, ACP).         community events.               • Clear information on the limits,
                • Common inquiries about land             • Media tours for crisis            rights and obligations of the
                  purchases and misunderstandings           management.                       holders.
                  about the role of ANATI.                • Channeling of complaints        • Communication protocols in
                                                            through            networks,      sensitive areas
                                                            institutional mail and 311.
Exclusion of • Risks         with       indigenous        • On-site        participation    • Training of staff in social and
vulnerable       communities and areas with high            during title deliveries.          cultural approach.
groups           population      density      (San        • Personalized attention in       • Informational materials tailored
(implicit   in   Miguelito).                                face-to-face consultations        to specific groups.
several        • The need to adapt messages and             and via the web.                • Increased territorial presence in
responses, but   processes to different cultural          • Coordination             with     vulnerable areas.
not explicitly   realities.                                 institutions to       advise    • Educational campaigns on rights
mentioned)     • Lack of clear information can              beneficiaries on how to           and benefits of the degree.
                 exclude people with less digital           take advantage of their
                 access.                                    degree.


                                                                                                                            107


                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
  Social Risks       Perceptions and concerns             Current Actions                 Proposed Actions


 Improper       • Information    arrives through    • Internal         channeling • Unified data handling protocols.
 handling    of   multiple channels (mail, 311,       according to the competent • Improve         traceability and
 personal         networks),     which   requires     management.                     information security.
 information      adequate control.                 • Institutional call center for • Data protection training for
                                                      follow-up.                      staff.
                                                    • Coordination        between
                                                      directorates to respond.



In conclusion, the interview reveals a Public Relations Office that is aware of the social risks associated
with the cadastre and titling process, with important advances in communication, coordination, and
digitalization, but with persistent challenges in: standardization of processes, equitable access to
information, management of territorial conflicts, strengthening of technical and social capacities, and
transparent planning and prioritization. The implementation of the Multipurpose Cadastre System and the
Program-for-Results is seen as an opportunity to modernize, unify, and strengthen institutional
management, enhance citizen confidence, and ensure a more robust social approach.




    •    Training Area of the Office of Human Resources

 Social Risks     Perceptions and concerns             Current Actions                     Proposed Actions




                                                                                                                 108


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
               • Staff are familiar with the           • Recording of trainings to              • Conduct a formal study of
                 National          Multipurpose          facilitate later access.                 training needs by specialty and
                 Cadastre Program but require          • Coordination with DIGECA, the            region.
                 greater operational clarity and         Office of the Public Prosecutor,       • Strengthen the training team to
                 access to updated information.          the DGI, the Public Registry,            make it more efficient and
               • There is no formal training             universities, and other entities to      socially focused
Limited          needs assessment, which limits          expand training offerings.             • Develop materials tailored to
access      to   strategic planning.                   • Use of regional rooms (e.g.,             regional and cultural contexts
information    • Trainings do not always                 Veraguas) to facilitate territorial    • Integrate the training area into
and cultural     consider regional or cultural           participation.                           the design of the National
adaptation       differences.                          • Wellness fairs and sensitization         Program to anticipate human
               • Internal        communication           activities (sign language, health,       talent needs.
                 depends on the vision of the            first aid, evacuation, ethnic-racial
                 immediate       boss,     which         discrimination)
                 generates inequality in access
                 to training.

                                                       • Coordination with Administration
                 • The training process does not
                                                         and Finance, MEF, Presidency,          • Strengthen the training team to
                   have a formalized flow, which
                                                         and CGR to expedite procurement          respond to the demand of the
Delay         in   affects the timeliness of
                                                         (10–13 days).                            National Program.
resolving          response.
                                                       • Use of panamacompra to hire            • Incorporate additional technical
procedures       • The lack of specialized staff
                                                         trainers.                                staff (surveyors, lawyers).
and                (35 additional surveyors and 20
                                                       • Preparation of manuals of              • Establish a formal training
weaknesses         lawyers) limits the institution's
                                                         procedures, organization and             planning flow
in                 operational capacity.
                                                         functions.                             • Improve coordination with
institutional    • Budget cuts affect the
                                                       • HR and SICLAR information                other directorates to strengthen
capacities         possibility of taking training to
                                                         system for monthly control.              human talent management.
Perceptions        the regional ones.
and concerns • The absence of clear planning           • Survey of SWOT and flowcharts          • Implement a system for
                                                         to improve internal processes.           prioritizing training needs
                   in mass titling generates
                                                                                                  aligned with the social risks of
                   uncertainty in the management
                                                                                                  the titling process.
                   of human resources.




Social Risks       Perceptions and concerns                     Current Actions                        Proposed Actions
              • The personnel who go to the • Conflict resolution training and • Strengthen training in social
                field face situations of conflict  mediation certification.            skills, mediation, and conflict
Territorial
                over     land      tenure    and • Coordination with institutions      management.
conflicts and
                community disputes.                such as IPHE for training in sign • Integrate social and cultural
the need for
              • It is recognized that social       language and inclusive care.        focus modules in all technical
social skills
                work must be strengthened to • Sensitization         activities   on   trainings.
in the field
                adequately      address    these   discrimination, mental health, • Select        regional     referents
                situations.                        substance use and wellbeing         (administrative, technical, legal)


                                                                                                                               109


                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                    • Lack of training in mediation                                              to support the scalability of
                      and conflict resolution can                                                pilots.
                      aggravate tensions.                                                      • External accompaniment to
                                                                                                 strengthen capacities in crisis
                                                                                                 management and community
                                                                                                 communication
                • Cases of staff with illnesses or      • Sign language trainings with • Strengthen training in inclusion,
                  conditions that may lead to             IPHE.                               accessibility, and care for
 Exclusion of     partial disability are identified.    • Employee wellness fairs and         vulnerable groups.
 vulnerable     • Attention to citizens requires          preventative health programs.     • Incorporate modules on the
 groups and       inclusive skills (sign language,      • Coordination with universities to   focus on gender, interculturality,
 insufficient     proper                  treatment,      recruit     professionals     and   and human rights.
 differentiated   accessibility).                         technicians.                      • Create an inclusive care
 care           • The lack of uniform training          • Leadership and transformation       protocol for officials and users.
                  can create gaps in serving              programs (Maxwell Foundation,
                  vulnerable groups.                      Panama Lidera).
 Improper    • There are channels for citizens • Channeling of citizen complaints • Set up a formal grievance
 handling of   (complaints mail, 311), but for    through institutional mail and     mechanism for workers
 personal
               workers there is still no formal   311.                             • Establish unified personal data
               complaint mechanism.             • Coordination             between   handling protocols.
 information
             • Personal information about         directorates to respond.         • Train staff on data protection
 and lack of
               officials and users flows • Internal information control              and confidentiality.
 internal
               between multiple directions,       systems (HR, SICLAR).
 grievance
               which     requires      adequate
 mechanisms
               control.

In conclusion, the interview reveals that the HR Training Area recognizes the social risks associated with
the cadastre and titling process, and that its role is strategic in mitigating them. Its contributions focus on:
strengthening the technical and social skills of staff, improving the planning and standardization of training,
ensuring equitable access to information, strengthening skills for conflict management, promoting inclusion
and differentiated care, and improving interinstitutional coordination. The development of the Multipurpose
Cadastre System represents an opportunity to further professionalize human resources, improve
institutional efficiency, and guarantee a robust social approach in the implementation of the National
Program.




     •    Equal Opportunities Area of the Office of Human Resources
  Social Risks           Perceptions and concerns                  Current Actions                     Proposed Actions
                      • ANATI has 61 civil servants         • Application of Resolution 609      • Establish      a   permanent
                        with disabilities and 107             of 2021, which establishes           interdisciplinary team to
                        persons with disabilities among       inclusion guidelines.                implement the Inclusion
 Exclusion of
                        civil servants and their families   • Priority given to persons with       Policy.
 persons with
                        (8.6% of the total), which            disabilities in procedures and     • Strengthen staff training on
 disabilities and
                        evidences the need for robust         services.                            accessibility,    appropriate
 lack          of
                        internal policies.                  • Training with SENADIS, the           treatment, and reasonable
 accessibility
                      • Between        January       and      Office      of    the   Public       accommodation.
                        November 2025, 106 land titles        Prosecutor,     ANTAI,     and
                        were issued to persons with           Transparency.

                                                                                                                             110


                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
 Social Risks         Perceptions and concerns                   Current Actions                    Proposed Actions
                     disabilities, but there are still    • Health and wellness activities    • Develop accessible materials
                     territorial gaps (e.g., Colón          to       improve        working     (plain language, alternative
                     concentrates 56, while other           conditions.                         formats)
                     provinces have 1–2).                 • Awareness days for officials,     • Create an inclusive care
                   • It is recognized that the              especially security.                protocol for users and
                     institution     requires       an    • Institutional registry of PwDs      employees.
                     interdisciplinary team (social,        and relatives for follow-up.      • Expand      data    collection
                     technical, and technological) to     • Accessibility Guide to Service      disaggregated by type of
                     properly      implement       the      Information                         disability and region.
                     Inclusion Policy.
                   • Security personnel need to
                     raise awareness to avoid
                     discriminatory practices.
                   • Attention to PwD should be a
                     priority, but there is still no
                     formalized          institutional
                     protocol.
                   • The     institution     has     47   • Gender-sensitization       and    • Strengthen gender equality
                     professional              women        nondiscrimination workshops.        training for all staff.
                     specialized at the operational       • Inclusion of women in             • Create       a       permanent
                     level, which shows progress,           technical areas such as land        institutional gender equity
                     but there are still gaps in            surveying.                          program.
                     traditionally       masculinized     • Weekly equity meetings of         • Incorporate gender indicators
                     technical areas.                       directors                           into annual reporting and
                   • Ten new women surveyors              • Gender-focused       workplace      National                Program
                     were incorporated, showing a           well-being activities.              monitoring.
Gender
                     positive change, although still                                          • Promote                 women's
discrimination
                     incipient.                                                                 participation in technical and
and gaps in
                   • Internal communication on                                                  leadership areas
labor
                     gender issues is carried out
participation
                     through        meetings        and
                     conferences, but there is no
                     consolidated         institutional
                     program.
                   • ANATI must comply annually
                     with       the     Ethnic-Racial
                     Prevention Program, which
                     implies             sustainability
                     challenges.
                   • The Inclusion Policy requires        • Training with specialized         • Expand training on social
                     more training for staff to be          institutions       (SENADIS,        issues and inclusion.
Lack          of
                     properly implemented.                  Attorney General's Office,        • Incorporate         mandatory
                   • Gaps are identified in terms of        ANTAI).                             sensitization modules into
institutional
                     awareness of disability, gender,     • Health and wellness activities      annual training plan
awareness and
                     ethnic diversity, and inclusive        that include prevention and       • Establish     a    monitoring
internal
                     treatment.                             awareness-raising topics.           system to measure changes in
capacity
                   • Staff    require    continuous       • Sensitization        materials      attitudes and practices.
weaknesses
                     training        to        avoid        available     for      security   • Integrate awareness-raising
                     discriminatory practices and           personnel.                          into institutional induction
                     improve customer service                                                   processes.




                                                                                                                            111


                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
  Social Risks         Perceptions and concerns                   Current Actions                    Proposed Actions
                    • The Inclusion Policy requires        • Priority attention to PwD in      • Develop an institutional
                      specialized human resources            procedures.                         mechanism       for     internal
                      and greater coordination with        • Registry     of    staff   with     complaints and complaints
                      HR.                                    disabilities    and      family     about discrimination
 Lack          of
                    • The institution needs to               members.                          • Establish an Inclusion and
 Institutional
                      strengthen its capacity to deal      • Coordination with external          Equal            Opportunities
 Mechanisms to
                      with cases of discrimination,          institutions for training and       Committee.
 Ensure
                      violence, or violation of rights.      technical support.                • Incorporate an inclusivity
 Equality      of
                    • There is no formal mechanism                                               perspective in all institutional
 Opportunity
                      to channel internal complaints                                             manuals and procedures.
                      related to discrimination.                                               • Strengthen coordination with
                                                                                                 HR for follow-up of cases
                                                                                                 and needs.
                    • Implementation        of     the     • Annual reports that include       • Establish            monitoring
                      Inclusion Policy requires              inclusion data.                     indicators      to     measure
                      continuity, resources, and           • Sensitization and training.         progress toward inclusion.
                      monitoring.                          • Coordination with external        • Integrate inclusion as a cross-
 Lack          of
                    • ANATI must comply with                 institutions.                       cutting axis of the National
 monitoring and
                      SDGs 1, 5, 8, 10, 11, 16 and 17,                                           Multipurpose          Cadastre
 sustainability
                      which      implies      constant                                           Program.
 of    inclusion
                      monitoring.                                                              • Secure resources to sustain
 actions
                    • Sustainability depends on                                                  awareness-raising          and
                      specialized staff and an                                                   training activities.
                      interdisciplinary team.                                                  • Strengthen data collection to
                                                                                                 improve decision-making.


In conclusion, the interview shows that the Equal Opportunities area recognizes the social risks associated
with exclusion, discrimination and lack of accessibility, and that it has made progress in concrete actions,
but still faces important challenges in: institutionalizing inclusion, strengthening internal capacities,
ensuring accessibility and proper treatment, improving the participation of women and PwD, and ensure
the sustainability of actions. The development of the Multipurpose Cadastre System represents an
opportunity to consolidate inclusion as a cross-cutting axis, strengthen institutional equity, and improve
citizen service.


     •    User Service Centre (CAU)

  Social Risks        Perceptions and concerns                   Current Actions                     Proposed Actions
                    • Most of the complaints              • Reassignment or return of cases    • Implement a user monitoring
                      received (82 cases handled; 2         when they require expansion or       system (number of cases,
                      are being processed) relate to        intervention    by      another      times, status).
                      delays in the process of titling      institution.                       • Expand the staff of the CAU,
 Delay         in     and cadastral conservation.         • Coordination     at      weekly      especially      in   cadastral
 resolving          • UCC has 30 days to close              meetings of directors to review      conservation.
 paperwork            cases,     but     operational        complaints and queries.            • Strengthen coordination with
                      capacity is limited (only 4         • Request of working groups with       technical directorates to
                      staff).                               Mapoteca and Conservación to         reduce response times.
                    • Cadastral Conservation has a          identify improvements.
                      high flow rate and only one

                                                                                                                              112


                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                    position assigned in the CAU,      • Training of liaison 311–AIG to       • Establish         performance
                    which generates bottlenecks.         improve customer service.              indicators and standard times
                  • There is no care time              • Face-to-face attention and             for each type of procedure.
                    measurement system or                direct channelling to competent      • Improve the traceability of
                    consolidated statistics.             offices.                               cases from 311, social
                                                                                                networks, and institutional
                                                                                                mail.

                  • Users       have     difficulty    • Service      through     multiple    • Deploy complaint boxes by
                    understanding the processes          channels: APP, web, telephone,         January 2026 to expand
                    of titling, conservation and         email, social networks.                accessibility
                    mass awarding.                     • Publication of the institutional     • Develop clear process and
                  • Institutional information is         mail in all the institution's          timing          informational
Limited access      not     always     clear     or      entrances.                             materials.
to information      accessible.                        • Confidential handling of the         • Measure the performance of
and               • Social networks receive              complainant.                           communication        channels
communication       inquiries that must be             • Coordination       with    local       (networks, 311, mail).
barriers            redirected to the institutional      authorities to share information     • Train staff in effective
                    email, which can generate            in the territory.                      communication and inclusive
                    loss of follow-up.                 • CAU participation in degree            care.
                  • There is no measurement of           fairs to guide users.                • Create a care protocol for
                    the impact of communication                                                 complex inquiries that require
                    channels.                                                                   follow-up




Social Risks       Perceptions and concerns                    Current Actions                        Proposed Actions
                 • CAU receives few complaints        • Personalized attention on site        • Implement        a    registration
                   from persons with disabilities,      and direct channeling to offices.       system disaggregated by type
                   which        may      indicate     • Confidential handling of user           of user (PwD, elderly, rural
                   underreporting or barriers to        information.                            area).
Exclusion of
                   access.                            • Training with INADHE to               • Strengthen the physical and
vulnerable
                 • Face-to-face care can be             improve customer service.               digital accessibility of UAC.
groups (PwD,
                   difficult for users in rural       • Coordination        with      local   • Train staff in inclusive care and
elderly, rural
                   areas or with reduced                authorities to facilitate access to     differential approach.
communities)
                   mobility.                            information.                          • Incorporate            reasonable
                 • Lack of statistics limits the                                                accommodation into care
                   identification of patterns of                                                channels (accessible formats,
                   exclusion.                                                                   personalized assistance)
                 • The UCC receives complaints        • Immediate referral to the             • Create a protocol for attention
                   related to title conflicts,          competent management.                   in cases of territorial conflict.
                   although in smaller volumes        • Coordination with technical           • Train staff in basic mediation
Conflicts          (approx. 8 complaints per            directorates to resolve sensitive       and      handling        sensitive
over      land     month).                              cases.                                  situations.
tenure           • The lack of clear information      • Participation in fairs and            • Improve communication on
disputes           on the status of procedures          delivery of titles to clarify           the status of procedures to
                   can increase social tension.         doubts in the territory.                reduce uncertainty.
                 • Massive award does not
                   generate many complaints,


                                                                                                                              113


                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                      but one case was registered in
                      Coclé.

                   • Currently, there are no            • Confidential handling of the      • Implement physical complaint
                     consolidated statistics on           complainant.                        boxes (January 2026)
 Lack         of     complaints,      claims   and      • Referral of cases to competent    • Create     a    unified     case
 institutional       queries.                             directorates.                       registration   and      tracking
 mechanisms        • There is no institutional          • Weekly review at directors'         system.
 for                 system for measuring times or        meetings.                         • Establish    service      quality
 complaints          user satisfaction.                                                       metrics.
 and               • The information is handled in                                          • Integrate 311, network, and
 monitoring          a fragmented way between                                                 mail information into a single
                     311, networks, mail and face-                                            dashboard.
                     to-face attention.

In conclusion, the interview shows that the CAU is a key actor for the social management of the National
Multipurpose Cadastre Program. Its main challenges are focused on: improving efficiency and response
times, strengthening the accessibility and clarity of information, adequately serving vulnerable groups,
managing territorial conflicts, and consolidating an institutional system for complaints and monitoring.
Strengthening the UCC is essential to improve citizen trust, ensure transparency and ensure a robust social
approach in the implementation of the Programme.




     •     National Directorate of Massive Adjudication

 Social Risks        Perceptions and concerns                  Current Actions                     Proposed Actions
                   • The DNAM faces technical           • Coordination with Mensura,        • Integrate       the     DNAM,
                     staff constraints, especially in     MiAmbiente, MIVIOT, and the         Measurement, and Public
                     cadastral surveys, which             Public Registry to advance          Registry databases to improve
                     delays the sweeping and mass         files.                              traceability.
                     titling processes.                 • Prioritization of areas without   • Strengthen technical staff
                   • There are databases that are         prior sweeping or with urgent       (surveyors, enumerators, GIS,
 Delay        in     not      integrated    between       social needs (e.g., Coclé).         lawyers).
 resolving           DNAM, measurement, the             • Use of tenure studies to avoid    • Incorporate managerial tools
 procedures          Public Registry, and the DGI,        unnecessary effort in already       for planning, monitoring, and
 and                 which generates duplication,         titled areas.                       quality assurance
 weaknesses          inconsistencies, and delays.       • Previous experiences of sweeps    • Ensure sustained funding to
 in                • Measurement can take up to           carried out with local support      maintain goals of 5,000–6,000
 institutional       18 months, even with                 (Chimán, Santo Tomás).              titles annually.
 capacities          continued monitoring.              • Bidding processes to hire         • Reduce measurement times by
                   • Lack of managerial and               service providers (e.g. Coclé).     investing in technology and
                     planning       tools     affects                                         equipment.
                     efficiency.                                                            • Strengthen regional UTOs,
                   • Cost containment limits UTO                                              especially in critical provinces
                     logistics and operational                                                such as Darien.
                     capacity.


                                                                                                                            114


                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                  • Without external financing,
                    annual production could fall to
                    1,000     shares,   affecting
                    national coverage.
                  • In areas with sprawling (e.g.     • Alternate              mediation     • Strengthen territorial mediation
                    West Panama), there are             mechanisms coordinated with            and create protocols for conflict
                    overlaps,             previous      the Office of Legal Counsel.           management.
                    segregations and disputes that    • Public exposure to settle            • Integrate             mandatory
                    make sweeping difficult.            differences.                           georeferencing in all plans to
                  • Competitive examinations are      • Coordination       with      local     avoid overlaps.
Conflicts           presented due to ignorance of       authorities to identify risks and    • Incorporate social staff or
over      land      the process, rather than            facilitate access                      community mediators in the
tenure              structural conflicts.             • Validation of previous titles          field teams.
disputes          • In vulnerable areas, there are      with the Public Registry.            • Develop prior information
                    security risks for teams          • Tenure studies to identify the         campaigns        to       reduce
                    (gangs, violence).                  nature of the tenure before            competitions due to lack of
                  • The lack of georeferenced           intervening.                           knowledge.
                    information in old maps
                    generates uncertainty and
                    conflicts.




 Social Risks         Perceptions and concerns                  Current Actions                      Proposed Actions
                   • The community is often            • Publication of timelines and         • Develop standardized and
                     unaware of the massive              flowcharts.                            accessible         information
                     awarding process, its stages      • Verbal communication and use           materials
                     and benefits.                       of maps during community             • Create a communication
                   • There is no communication           meetings                               manual for field teams
Limited access
to information
                     manual for field staff.           • Coordination     with    local       • Strengthen the pre-sweep
                   • The technical information           authorities   to     announce          outreach strategy.
and
                     (plans, easements, property         projects.                            • Incorporate digital tools for
communication
                     adjustments) is not always        • Coverage of events and public          citizen monitoring of the
barriers
                     understood by the people.           exhibitions on the ANATI               process.
                   • The lack of structure in            website.
                     municipalities     makes   it
                     difficult to disseminate the
                     process.
                   • There is no social worker in      • Registration       of   special      • Incorporate social approach in
                     the field teams, which limits       conditions in observations of          field teams.
                     differentiated care.                the title.                           • Create protocols for the care
                   • Communities with limited          • Enumerators             collect        of PwD, the elderly and
Exclusion    of      resources require additional        information with the support of        vulnerable families.
vulnerable           support to understand the           local authorities.                   • Train staff in a differential
groups               process.                          • Home care to avoid mobility of         approach      and    inclusive
                   • Information on PwD, minors          vulnerable people.                     treatment.
                     or people with guardians is                                              • Strengthen coordination with
                     recorded, but there is no                                                  SENADIS and MIVIOT for
                     social protocol.                                                           special cases.


                                                                                                                             115


                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                     • There is no management tool        • Internal quality control based   • Develop       an     integrated
                       to monitor the process.              on technical expertise.            monitoring      and      quality
                     • The update of the DNAM             • Validation with the Public         assurance system.
 Lack           of     database does not reflect            Registry to avoid duplication.   • Establish national standards
 institutional
                       changes after the degree.          • Review of plans by cadastral       for cadastral sweeps
                     • Quality control relies on own        survey.                          • Incorporate performance and
 mechanisms
                       resources and accumulated                                               traceability indicators.
 for monitoring
                       experience.                                                           • Integrate DNAM information
 and       quality
                     • The lack of integration of                                              with the Directorate of
 assurance
                       databases        limits      the                                        Cadastral Information and
                       identification of properties                                            Appraisal.
                       without      titles     (approx.
                       282,324).


In conclusion, the Directorate of Massive Adjudication is a central actor for the National Multipurpose
Cadastre Program. The interviews show that their main social and operational challenges are concentrated
in: structural delays due to lack of personnel and technology, territorial conflicts resulting from outdated
information, communication gaps with the population, lack of social focus in the field teams, fragmented
databases that hinder planning, and budget limitations that affect sustainability. The development of the
Multipurpose Cadastre System presents an opportunity to: integrate information, strengthen technical and
social capacities, improve the efficiency of the process, and guarantee a more inclusive, transparent, and
sustainable mass titling.

     •     National Directorate of Indigenous Lands and Municipal Property

   Social Risks         Perceptions and concerns                 Current Actions                    Proposed Actions
                      • The process lacks formal          • Prior communication with         • Incorporate formal cultural
                        cultural         adjustments,       traditional authorities.           adaptations into the process
                        especially in territories with    • Informative workshops where        (language,           protocols,
                        a strong ethnic identity.           the Law is read and discussed.     community times).
                      • Communities are often             • Explanations in the field on     • Strengthen coordination with
                        unaware of the process,             points,      easements,    and     the VMAI to improve ancestry
                        which generates mistaken            adjustments to properties.         verification.
 Lack of cultural       expectations (for example,        • Meetings with translation        • Develop culturally adapted
 appropriateness        believing that ANATI will           when necessary.                    informational materials (not
 and lack of            perform       house-to-house      • Minutes on site to record          just reading the Law).
 knowledge     of       measurements).                      observations and oppositions.    • Include staff with intercultural
 the      process     • Meetings with authorities                                              competencies or community
 among                  and communities require                                                mediators.
 indigenous             translation, which makes                                             • Standardize an intercultural
 peoples                workshops      longer     and                                          communication manual for the
 Perceptions and        communication difficult.                                               technical team.
 concerns             • The VMAI's verification of
                        ancestry is questionable, as it
                        is sometimes based only on
                        current surveys and does not
                        reflect the history of the
                        territory.
                      • The diversity of peoples
                        (Guna, Emberá, Wounaan,

                                                                                                                            116


                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
  Social Risks       Perceptions and concerns                  Current Actions                     Proposed Actions
                       Ngäbe, Naso, Buglé) implies
                       different     forms        of
                       organization and authority,
                       which requires differentiated
                       approaches.
                    • There are conflicts owing to      • Land tenure studies to identify   • Strengthen         intercultural
                      overlaps             between        the     presence     of    non-     mediation mechanisms.
                      communities, changes of             indigenous persons.               • Integrate            mandatory
                      authorities,    or    internal    • Information or mediation            georeferencing of indigenous
                      disputes (e.g., Emberá).            tables to resolve competitions.     territories.
                    • In the regions, the law           • Minutes in the field to record    • Create protocols to resolve
                      requires previous private           disagreements.                      overlaps               between
                      titles to be respected, which     • Coordination with Mensura,          communities.
                      generates tensions with             IGNTG and MiAmbiente to           • Develop more robust tenure
Territorial           communities that claim              validate information.               studies with a historical focus.
conflicts     and     ancestry.                         • Workshops        divided     by   • Implement an interoperable
tenure disputes     • In protected areas (PAs),           ethnicity or territory to avoid     indigenous            territorial
in     indigenous     overlapping with indigenous         conflicts.                          information system.
territories           territories         generates
                      institutional resistance and
                      environmental conflicts.
                    • The requested polygons
                      usually include more than
                      one community, which
                      complicates the delimitation.
                    • Formal oppositions are filed
                      through lawyers or during
                      the measurement work.
                    • The steering has limited         • Structure by steps and phases in   • Implement a digital workflow
                      equipment,          although       shared Excel.                        for indigenous files.
                      considered optimal for the       • Coordination with Surveying to     • Strengthen the technical staff
                      current load.                      validate polygons.                   to review graphic proposals.
                    • The costs of large park          • Support from IGNTG in the          • Integrate    GIS      databases
                      plans (more than 100 ha)           Commission.                          between addresses.
                      are usually expensive,           • Review of sweeps and couplings     • Increase     resources      for
                      which the State must bear.         of information with other            measuring in indigenous
                    • There are 27 files under           addresses.                           territories.
Structural
                      purification since 2013-                                              • Set specific annual targets for
process delays
                      2020, with an approximate                                               indigenous territories.
and institutional
                      progress of 1 per year.
constraints
                    • Dependence       on     other
                      directorates (surveys, ITG,
                      MiAmbiente)        generates
                      delays.
                    • There is a lack of a digital
                      workflow to manage files.
                    • GIS information depends
                      on other areas and is not
                      integrated.
                    • Some individual cases            • Registration   of     personal     • Incorporate a social approach
Exclusion     of
                      reject collective property         information according to Law         and personnel specialized in
vulnerable
                      (e.g., Bocas del Toro).            38.                                  community work.

                                                                                                                            117


                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
   Social Risks      Perceptions and concerns               Current Actions                  Proposed Actions
 groups within      • There is no social worker      • Informative workshops with      • Create accessible materials
 indigenous           on the team, which limits        authorities and community.        adapted       to       different
 territories          differentiated care.           • Minutes on site to record         educational levels.
                    • The communities expect           particular situations.          • Establish     protocols      for
                      ANATI to resolve internal                                          individual cases that do not
                      conflicts that go beyond its                                       want collective ownership.
                      mandate.                                                         • Strengthen coordination with
                    • Lack       of     accessible                                       indigenous          institutions
                      materials makes it difficult                                       (CONAPIP, congresses).
                      to understand the process.
                    • There are no reproducible      • Informational workshops and     • Create a monitoring system
                      materials to inform the          pre-meetings.                     accessible to indigenous
                      community.                     • Field minutes with space for      authorities.
                    • Communication depends            observations.                   • Develop         informational
 Lack          of     on workshops and verbal        • Requests for a meeting at the     materials (maps, infographics,
 monitoring,          explanations.                    Directorate    to     present     guides)
 transparency and   • No     complaints      were      information.                    • Integrate            culturally
 communication        received for 311, indicating                                       appropriate       consultation
 mechanisms           low accessibility of the                                           mechanisms.
                      mechanism.                                                       • Strengthen transparency by
                    • The monitoring of the                                              publishing    progress      by
                      process is not clearly                                             territory
                      defined for the population.

In conclusion, the Directorate of Indigenous Lands and Municipal Assets faces complex challenges arising
from: the cultural and territorial diversity of indigenous peoples, overlap with protected areas, lack of
integration of cadastral information, limited institutional capacity, and the absence of adapted social and
communication protocols; however, it also shows important advances in interinstitutional coordination, use
of GIS, community workshops and mediation mechanisms. The Multipurpose Cadastre System represents
a key opportunity to: integrate indigenous territorial information, improve the efficiency of the process,
strengthen territorial governance, and guarantee a more robust social and intercultural approach.


4. Desk analysis.

In this section, social participation reports on land administration are highlighted.

     • Bicentennial Pact (2021) National Consensus on Land Administration
Through the AGORA digital platform, civil society in general provided a plural of proposals (175,922) for
lines of action to close inequality gaps and inform the formulation of public policies. Of the ten national
consensuses in matters of State (governance), two can be deduced that contemplate the administration of
lands. These consensuses are still in force and were addressed in the Government Strategic Plan 2025-2029:




                                                                                                                      118


                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
    Consensus                           Gap                                               Scope
                       Gap Description:                           Objective:
                       Public management has gaps and              To strengthen public policies regarding
                       deficiencies in guaranteeing access to     transparency and equity, in order to respond to the
                       the rights that the State must ensure to   solution of the country's main problems and
                       its citizens through its institutions.     guarantee equal conditions of individual, social,
                                                                  and collective rights to all inhabitants of the
 Public Policies
                       Obstacles:                                 Republic                of                Panama.
 for
                        Lack of information addressed to the
 Development.
                       community on land regulation               Policy                                Guidelines:
                       processes and, on the other hand, the       Deconcentrate land titling processes in order to
                       processes generate costs that make it      reduce processing costs and expedite them.
                       difficult for land holders to complete
                       the titling procedures.

                       Description      of     the     gap:       Objective:
                       There is no real division of the            To guarantee the strengthening and modernization
                       exercise of power among the organs         of institutions, both at the national and local levels,
                       of public power that must exercise it;     ensuring, among others, the principles of
                       the law is neither complied with nor       separation of powers, a system of meritocracy,
                       enforced by those who should ensure        aimed at satisfying the socioeconomic needs of the
 Efficient     civil   the effectiveness of the social,           population                   in               general.
 service         in    individual, and collective rights of
 consolidating         citizens.                                  Public              policy              guidelines:
 the rule of law.                                                  Review the legal instruments and mechanisms for
                       Obstacles:                                 land        titling     in       the       country.
                        Inefficient application and lack of        Institutional program for quality of service
                       transparency in land titling processes,    improvements, including those provided by
                       which affects a large percentage of        unregulated public or private sector enterprises.
                       the population.




     •   High-Level Roundtable between National Government authorities and Indigenous
         Authorities with ANATI participation (2025)

On November 25, 2025, a high-level meeting (participatory meeting) was held between the indigenous
authorities grouped in the National Coordinator of Indigenous Peoples of Panama (COONAPIP) and
representatives of the National Government (Minister of Environment, Vice Minister of Indigenous Affairs
from MINGOB and National Director of Indigenous Lands from ANATI) where the status of collective
titling processes and the requirements that must be met was reviewed. among them the environmental ones.

According to administrative data, most of the processes (63%) date from before 2020 and on average report
an advance of 19% (3 of 16 stages). Another 25 percent have land tenure conflicts (six of the 24 applications
that are pending).
                                                                                                                            119


                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
The meeting concluded with the delivery of the proposal for action to address the current situation.

           Application                           Concerns                        Proposed Actions
 • Carry out the titling of the       • Excessive bureaucracy. Avoid      • Set up a working group between
   collective property of our           steps that go against Law 72 of     the institutions of ANATI
   ancestrally occupied lands in an     2008 that lend themselves to        (Directorate of Indigenous
   expeditious     and     diligent     stalling the process of titling     Lands), Mi Ambiente and
   manner.                              collective lands.                   MINGOB (Vice-Ministry of
 • Carry out the identification,      • Reducing squatter occupations       Indigenous Affairs).
   demarcation, and registration        that have been on the rise        • Comply with Law 37 of 2016 on
   of the territories declared by                                           Free, Prior, and Informed
   law     as    Comarcas     and                                           Consultation.
   Collective Lands.


The desk review shows that the social challenges associated with land administration in Panama (including
lack of accessible information, excessive bureaucracy, tenure conflicts, limited cultural adequacy, and weak
institutional transparency) continue to be structural gaps that directly affect the population, especially
indigenous peoples and the most vulnerable sectors. The measures proposed both in the consensus of the
Bicentennial Pact and in the High-Level Table with indigenous authorities agree on the need to modernize
the processes, strengthen inter-institutional coordination, comply with consultation processes, and improve
the mechanisms of collective titling and territorial regularization. In this context, the Multipurpose Cadastre
Program is positioned as a strategic tool for ANATI to strengthen its institutional social management
system, adopt international best practices, and preventively and effectively manage social risks, thereby
ensuring greater equity, transparency, and governance in land administration in the country.




                                                                                                             120


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
