Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Nov-2025 | Report No: PIDPA00228




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                Operation Name
                                                                                        Uganda Cities and
                               EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                     Municipalities
Uganda                                                      P511300
                               AFRICA                                                   Infrastructure
                                                                                        Development (UCMID)
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date     Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               03-Nov-2025                  10-Feb-2026                 Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Ministry of Finance,
                               Ministry of Lands, Housing
Planning and Economic
                               and Urban Development
Development

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to enhance the institutional performance of selected urban local governments and ministries for urban
planning and management and improve access to climate smart infrastructure, services and jobs for urban residents
and displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                      540.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                         540.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                      510.00
    IPF Component                                                                                              30.00
  Total Financing                                                                                              540.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00


                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                        Official Use Only
             The World Bank
             Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)



    FINANCING
       Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                      540.00
          World Bank Lending                                                                                                 540.00

    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
    Decision




    B. Introduction and Context


     Country Context

1.       Uganda is at a critical juncture in its development trajectory. With an annual urban growth rate of 5.2% - among
the fastest in Africa – and a population projected to surpass rural numbers by 2060, the country’s cities and towns are
increasingly central to economic transformation. Urban areas are already hubs for trade, services, and manufacturing, and
account for more than 1/3rd of all new jobs created. Uganda’s Fourth National Development Plan (NDP IV) (2025/26–
2029/30) sets ambitious targets: achieving higher household incomes, full monetization of the economy, and creating 2.5
million new jobs. Urbanization is recognized as a critical enabler of these goals, especially for youth and women.
2.       Despite recent economic growth, Uganda’s development needs remain immense. Limited public financing - driven
by low domestic revenue, rising debt service costs, and persistent under-execution of the development budget (with
absorption shortfalls of 5-12% and budget credibility gaps of 14-22%1) - has restricted fiscal space for infrastructure
expansion. However, the challenge is not solely about funding. Technical capacity gaps, fragmented planning, and weak
institutional systems also constrain the effectiveness of investments. This is reflected in gaps such as urban roads (only
13% of the network is urban, and less than half is paved), poor public transport integration, and inadequate solid waste
management (only 30-40% collected, only 4% recycled). Unplanned spatial expansion and weak urban planning further
threaten productivity, environmental sustainability, and resilience. Addressing these issues requires not just increased
investment, but also robust reforms, strengthened systems, and enhanced technical capacity to ensure resources translate
into sustainable results.
3.      Climate change further compounds these pressures. Uganda ranks 14th globally in disaster risk and 48th in
preparedness, facing frequent floods, mudslides, and extreme weather events. Vulnerable communities, especially the
urban poor, contend with limited job security, poverty, and poor access to basic services. As part of the Paris Agreement,
Uganda aims to reduce emissions by 24.7% by 2030 and has enacted the 2021 National Climate Change Act to strengthen
mitigation and adaptation2. The UCMID Program consolidates climate adaptation and mitigation into a single strategy,
supporting investments in drainage, green infrastructure, nature-based solutions, and low-carbon mobility. At least 60%
of program-financed investments will deliver measurable climate co-benefits.


1 MoFPED, Semi-Annual and Annual Budget Performance Reports FY 2019/20–2023/24; UNICEF National Budget Brief FY 2023/24

2
    Uganda Updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), September 2022



                                                                                                                                  Page 2



                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)



   Sectoral and Institutional Context

4.      Uganda’s cities and towns are critical engines of economic growth and jobs; however, unplanned spatial expansion
threatens to curtail this productive function of urban areas. Uganda’s urban areas generate around 70%3 of the country’s
non-agricultural Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and account for 36% of total job creation. Urban areas are growing swiftly,
almost twice as fast as the national growth rate. The urban population, which currently stands at 27% (2024 Census), is
projected to surpass the rural population by 20604, increasing pressure on urban infrastructure, services, and natural
resources. Urban economies hold significant potential for local economic development and job creation, particularly for
youth and women. Uganda is projected to add about 1 million new entrants to the labor force each year from 2025 to
2035, totaling 10 million people5. With over 75% of the population under 35 and a median age of 15.9 years, the country
faces growing pressure to generate productive employment6. Yet, the economy currently creates only a fraction of the
jobs needed, with most young people working in informal or unpaid roles. Urban areas offer the greatest opportunity to
absorb this expanding labor force through diversified economic activities, infrastructure investment, and enterprise
growth.
5.      Lack of integrated urban planning has hampered productivity-enhancing urban development. Uganda’s urban
planning faces critical gaps, and yet, only the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area (GKMA) has a spatial plan. Most urban
areas rely on basic physical plans that are neither integrated with spatial nor economic development strategies, leaving
investments unguided. In newly upgraded secondary cities, plans often exclude expanded boundaries, while many smaller
municipalities lack plans altogether. Uncontrolled spatial expansion has led to urban sprawl, higher infrastructure costs,
environmental degradation, pollution, and increased flooding. Weak land ownership systems and complex administration
further hinder development control and infrastructure investments. Local governments lack qualified personnel for
planning and enforcement, while MoLHUD lacks the capacity to establish the legally mandated integrated urban planning
system or support Local Governments (LGs) in preparing their plans, undermining efforts for sustainable urbanization.
6.      Urban infrastructure has failed to keep up with the pressing needs. Urban roads make up only 13% (19,959 km)
of the country’s road network. In addition, the quality of these roads is poor, with less than half being paved (1,188 km)7.
Public transport lacks integration, primarily catering to motorized vehicles with limited options for pedestrians and
alternative transit modes. Urban flooding has worsened due to poor drainage systems and solid waste management
(SWM) in urban areas. Generally, only 30-40% of urban solid waste is collected, and only 4% is currently being reused and
recycled. Poor waste collection practices exacerbate urban flooding risks, as drainage systems become clogged and
encroached wetlands lose their flood-buffering capacities.
7.       Institutional weaknesses, especially at the local level, constrain effective urban management. Limited technical
and financial capacity8 restricts their ability to implement effective planning, deliver essential services, and enforce
regulations. These gaps mean that even when resources are available, their impact is diminished—critical infrastructure
suffers, as seen in the accelerated deterioration of roads due to insufficient maintenance and rehabilitation, which further
compounds future costs. Addressing these challenges requires more than additional funding; it demands targeted
capacity-building, institutional reforms, and the establishment of sustainable systems to ensure that investments translate
into lasting improvements and support Uganda’s urban growth and economic transformation objectives.


3 Ministry of Lands, Housing & Urban Development, Uganda State of Urban Sector Report – 2021-2022

4 The demographic boom: An explainer on Uganda’s population trends, World Bank – February 2021
5 https://eprcug.org/eprc-in-the-news/where-should-the-ndp-iv-focus-to-create-more-jobs/
6 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/uganda/publication/uganda-jobs-strategy-creating-more-jobs-for-ugandas-youth-and-economic-transformation
7 Urban Sector Report – 2024, MoLHUD
8 A comprehensive baseline data set from 47 LGs showed deficiencies in planning frameworks, revenue collection, procurement, financial management, project execution, E&S safeguards, and staffing.



                                                                                                                                                                                                              Page 3



                                                                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)


8.       Refugee-hosting districts (RHDs) are increasingly experiencing pressures, particularly in rapidly growing secondary
towns and urban centers that accommodate refugees. These areas face acute challenges in delivering adequate urban
infrastructure and services—such as health, education, housing, water and sanitation, solid waste management, and
mobility systems—amid overstretched municipal capacities. Drawing on lessons from the Uganda Support to Municipal
Infrastructure Development Additional Financing (USMID AF), the proposed operation ill place stronger emphasis on urban
resilience and inclusion by: (i) mitigating the urban impacts of refugee influxes while fostering inclusive local economic
development for both refugees and host communities; (ii) supporting sustainable solutions to protracted displacement by
promoting the socio-economic integration of refugees in urban environments; (iii) improving livelihoods and expanding
access to social services, markets, goods, and job opportunities for refugees and Refugee Host Community (RHC); (iv)
strengthening preparedness and adaptive capacity to manage future refugee flows while preventing uncontrolled urban
expansion and guiding growth toward sustainable, planned development; and (v) reinforcing social cohesion and peaceful
co-existence through inclusive urban planning, service delivery, and community-level investments.
9.       Uganda will require concerted urban reforms to navigate this pivotal moment in its urban transition. With urban
population projected to more than double in the next two decades, the challenge is to ensure that rapid expansion
translates into productive jobs for a youthful labor force rather than fragmented sprawl and informality. The government
of Uganda (GoU) has already taken important strategic and institutional steps. Notably, the Sustainable Urbanization and
Housing (SUH) program targets “higher household incomes and employment for sustainable socio-economic
transformation” and covers the following five strategic objectives: urban infrastructure, physical planning, drainage and
waste management, economic opportunities, affordable housing, and policy, legal and institutional strengthening. The
GoU has also established 10 new secondary cities and now is preparing to upgrade 5 additional municipalities into cities,
prioritizing metropolitan management for Greater Kampala, and anchoring growth on strategic corridors. The next step in
the urban reform is to equip and support cities and municipalities to meet these strategic and institutional goals and to
consolidate these initiatives into a coherent programmatic framework that positions cities as engines of inclusive growth,
resilience, and innovation. Supporting sustainable waste management in urban areas will also be critical in the next five
years.
10.      The reform path builds on hard-won lessons from earlier Bank-financed and government-led programs. USMID
demonstrated the value of performance-based grants to strengthen local systems, expand infrastructure, and crowd in
owned source revenue increase. GKMA-UDP has introduced metropolitan coordination, but also revealed persistent gaps
in land acquisition, E&S enforcement, and cross-jurisdiction planning. The Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers
Program (UGiFT) highlighted the results-based transfers to incentivize social service delivery, while Uganda Strengthening
Public Investment and Asset Management for Growth and Resilience Operation (PIM PLUS) underscores the importance
of sound project preparation, appraisal, and portfolio management for long-term efficiency. Together, these experiences
point to the need for a programmatic approach that integrates fiscal transfers, institutional strengthening, and governance

  PforR Program Scope

11.     The Government of Uganda program (p) is the Sustainable Urbanization and Housing (SUH) is one of the eighteen
flagship programs under the NDPIV for the period 2025–2030, with the goal of “achieving higher household incomes and
employment for sustainable socio-economic transformation.” The government program includes five strategic objectives
covering urban infrastructure, physical planning, drainage and waste management, economic opportunities, affordable
housing and policy, legal and institutional strengthening. The UCMID Program (P) will cover a subset of the SUH program
targeting investment areas eligible for PforR funding. The program will cover ten secondary cities, eleven municipalities
supported under the previous USMID Program, fifteen new municipalities and eleven refugee-hosting districts (RHDs).
The new municipalities can only be admitted to the program upon demonstrating compliance with the minimum access
conditions, including adequate institutional capacity and the prepared physical development plans. Furthermore,

                                                                                                                        Page 4



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)


implementation of the physical investments in the new municipalities is expected to commence in year two after
preparation of the subprojects designs and required safeguards documents and enhancing their ESHS risk management
and capacities. The WHR shall focus on the economic integration of host communities and refugees. Eligible urban areas
in the RHD will be selected if their plans and strategies and prioritized infrastructure demonstrate a clear focus on
improving livelihoods of both refugees and the host communities. Intervention areas considered risky for implementation
under the PforR arrangement will be excluded. The following areas of the government program will not be included: (i)
public transport, especially the BRT and LRT, (ii) SWM infrastructure especially “brown fields”, and (iii) housing
development services and institutions. Furthermore, high-value contracts involving procurement of goods, works, and
non-consulting and consulting services whose estimated values exceed the applicable Operational Procurement Review
Committee thresholds set out in the World Bank’s Procurement Procedure are not within the Program boundaries and
are excluded from the Program.
12.      UCMID represents the next phase of Uganda’s urban reform agenda, placing cities at the heart of job creation,
productivity gains, and economic transformation. By channeling investment through economic corridors, the Program will
improve access to regional markets, reduce congestion, lower logistics costs, and enable small and medium enterprises
to thrive—particularly those employing youth and women. Linking fiscal transfers with strengthened PFM, procurement,
and safeguards systems will enhance accountability and ensure that urban investments are climate-resilient, inclusive,
and sustainable. Reductions in congestion and flood-related disruptions—reflected in fewer “flood days”—will increase
market uptime, shorten travel times, and connect workers more efficiently to jobs, thereby improving firm productivity
and supporting better-quality, more sustainable employment. Most importantly, UCMID will institutionalize reforms that
position cities as drivers of Uganda Vision 2040 and Uganda National Development Plan IV by aligning urban growth with
a long-term jobs agenda, leveraging private sector participation, and building governance systems that enable continuity
and scale. Through these reforms, UCMID will: (i) generate immediate construction jobs and create sustainable
employment in urban services and operations, (ii) stimulate local economies and entrepreneurship—especially for youth,
women, and MSMEs, and (iii) foster inclusion and skills development for Uganda’s next generation of urban workers.
13.     Development partners play a crucial role in supporting Uganda's urban development initiatives. The World Bank
is a member of the Urban Development Partners Group, which brings together key actors interested in supporting the
Government of Uganda’s urbanization agenda. The active partners include the Agence Française de Développement (AFD),
the European Union (EU), and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), and the Japanese International Cooperation
Agency (JICA), all of which align with Uganda's urbanization goals. AFD is currently co-financing with the World Bank the
GKMA-UDP and other projects in four secondary cities in Uganda. The EU finances several projects that focus on
sustainable urban development, emphasizing green urbanization and industrialization. AIIB, with its broader mission to
promote sustainable cities and infrastructure. Although the task team has been exploring opportunities for co-financing
and/or parallel financing from these partners to support UCMID, aiming to leverage financing sources for their strengths
in urban resilience and infrastructure development, no development partner has confirmed yet.
14.      At least 5.6 million people are expected to directly benefit from the program (50% of them women), these include
urban residents in participating cities, municipalities, and refugee-hosting districts, who will benefit from improved access
to essential urban infrastructure and services—such as all-weather roads, stormwater drainage, street lighting, public
markets, and other urban amenities. These investments will enhance mobility, reduce flood risks, and improve public
safety, while also stimulating local economic activity. By program closure, the UCMID is expected to directly support the
creation of approximately 5,000 permanent jobs in market operations, maintenance services, waste management, and
logistics. Beyond direct employment creation, the Program will enable an expanded ecosystem for micro, small, and
medium enterprises (MSMEs), unlocking multiplier effects across construction, services, logistics, and retail sectors.
Strengthened infrastructure and improved market access will reduce business costs, stimulate demand for labor, and
improve household incomes in participating urban areas. These opportunities will particularly benefit women, youth, and


                                                                                                                         Page 5



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)


low-income populations by improving their access to livelihoods and economic participation. Expanded infrastructure will
also create a more enabling environment for informal and small-scale businesses, vendors, and traders to thrive.

 C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)

 15.      The program development objective is to enhance the institutional performance of selected urban local
 governments and ministries for urban planning and management and improve access to climate smart infrastructure,
 services and jobs for urban residents and displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas.

 PDO Level Results Indicators
    • Enhanced institutional capacity of city, municipal and national institutions for urban management (percentage),
       as measured from the performance achievement of targets in the respective DLIs1-2, & 7 for LGs and DLIs 9-10
       for MDAs and verified during the annual performance assessment (APA) by an independent verification agent
       (IVA).
    • People in urban areas provided with improved living conditions through access to climate smart infrastructure
       and services (number) disaggregated by sex (number), by refugee host community (number) and refugee
       populations (number) as measured through the achievement of targets set under DLI 3, 5 &7 and verified during
       the APA by an IVA.
    • People in urban areas provided with new and better jobs (number) disaggregated by sex (number) and by refugee
       host community (number) and refugee populations (number) as measured according to the achievement of
       targets specified for the intermediate indicators listed in Table 2. These are associated with DLIs 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8,
       and will be verified during the APA by an IVA.


 D. Environmental and Social Effects

16.      The Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) for the UCMID Program was undertaken in alignment
with the World Bank's Policy and Directive for Program-for-Results Financing and building on lessons learned from the
ESSAs for USMID and GKMA UDP. Based on the ESSA, the E&S risk rating of the Program is assessed to be Substantial
because of the types of infrastructure investments under the Program, their locations in urban areas and capacity
weaknesses to implement ESHS risk management measures. The ESSA confirmed the presence of an Environmental Social
Health and Safety (ESHS) system to assess and manage risks and impacts of the Program. Uganda has laws that address,
inclusion, and accountability issues, and has adequate legal and institutional frameworks for managing ESHS risks.
However, challenges exist in the implementation and enforcement of such laws and the functioning of the ESHS system
and institutional capacity overall. The ESSA has identified significant gaps including delays in the ESIA review and approval
process by NEMA, insufficient monitoring and poor enforcement of ESHS measures resulting in multiple incidents
(including fatalities) involving both workers and community members, a persistent need for capacity building within local
governments, difficulties with waste management, capacity limitations in terms of personnel, equipment and budgetary
allocations, especially at local levels, lack of early and sustained stakeholder engagement, inadequate compensation for
project-affected persons (PAPs), challenges with stakeholder engagement, including grievance management, and limited
capacity among contractors and consultants to effectively address, implement and enforce ESHS. Measures to address
the identified gaps include: (a) support to the Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) Department and the Labor
Department under the MoGLSD to help build its oversight systems, capacity and instituting a certification program for
OHS professionals in Uganda; (b) aligning land acquisition processes & requirements with World Bank PforR principles on


                                                                                                                          Page 6



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)


Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement such as providing in all cases of land and asset acquisition under the
Program for fair compensation and restoring livelihoods for PAPs affected by the Program; (c) aligning labor requirements
with World Bank’s core principle of public and workers safety; and, (d) strengthening GRMs by enforcing implementation,
improving documentation with MGLSD (as oversight agency), integrating project-level GRMs with the national system,
and automating grievance management systems.

17.     The E&S documents include specific measures to mitigate the risk of discrimination against or exclusion of any
affected individuals or groups in providing or receiving benefits under the Program. These measures are described in detail
in the ESCP for the IPF and the ESSA report, as well as any ToR that will duly incorporate relevant Bank ES requirements.
The following are examples of the mitigation measures included in all the aforementioned documents: (a) strengthening
the capacity of the Project Implementing Teams, workers, contractors, subcontractors, and service providers, which shall
include worker training and sensitization on the obligations of project participants to ensure non-discrimination of
individual or groups who are vulnerable or marginalized; (b) ensuring that contracts, codes of conduct, hiring procedures,
whistle-blower protection protocols, and other measures, as needed, are in place to allow remediation of cases of
discrimination; (c) designing and implementing a mechanism to receive and report grievances to the World Bank,
proposing appropriate remediation, and following up on agreed actions to resolve cases of discrimination reported
through a dedicated hotline; and (d) developing a strong data management system and process that secures personal data
and information in a manner that is safe, ethical, and confidential.

18.      Furthermore, the SEP and ESSA reference GoU’s Circular on Uganda’s Social Safeguard Policies, issued on
September 21, 2023, by MoFPED. The circular states the following: (a) all World Bank-financed projects in Uganda must
be implemented in a manner consistent with the principles of non-discrimination, as provided under Article 21 of the
Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. These projects should also be implemented in accordance with World Bank
policies and applicable Legal Agreements. Under these projects, no person will be discriminated against or stigmatized,
and the principles of non-discrimination and inclusion will be adhered to. Support should be provided to all project
beneficiaries; (b) all implementing entities of World Bank-financed projects should agree and implement specific
mitigation measures to address non-discrimination; (c) these mitigation measures will require enhancing Program
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), as well as strengthening existing Program monitoring by implementing entities,
including third-party monitoring where applicable; and (d) each Program implementing entity shall develop
comprehensive guidelines to address non-discrimination.

19.     The World Bank will support enhanced monitoring of the risk of exclusion or discrimination for vulnerable and
marginalized individuals or groups, as well as the efficacy of the agreed mitigation measures. An Enhanced Implementation
Support and Monitoring (EISM) mechanism will primarily focus on supporting project teams to address grievances and
concerns from beneficiaries, communities, and workers relating to discrimination from project benefits. This includes the
implementation of a hotline for individuals, beneficiaries, communities, and workers to lodge complaints of discrimination
and exclusion under the project or voice their concerns without fear of reprisal. As part of the project level GRM, a hotline
(0800 333125), hosted and operated by a local non-governmental organization on behalf of the EISM firm, has been
established for vulnerable or marginalized individuals or groups to lodge complaints of discrimination. The guidelines on
how the hotline will be used and cases managed are provided in the Program E&S documents.
20.     Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank
supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to the existing
program grievance mechanism or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received
are promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit
their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which

                                                                                                                         Page 7



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)


determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures,
and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address
complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought
directly to the Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on
how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit https://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For
information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, please visit
https://accountability.worldbank.org.
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component

21.     The environmental risk rating for the IPF component is assessed to be Moderate. The IPF Component will mainly
support technical assistance with minimal or no direct physical works. It will also not support preparation of feasibility
studies and designs of investments financed by the PforR. However, it will support the conceptualization and piloting of a
corridor-based approach to urban investment planning, including the development of national corridor design guidelines
and investment packaging tools that will help structure integrated infrastructure projects—linking roads, drainage,
markets, and utility networks—along strategic urban corridors; however, there will be no construction under this
component. The Social Risk Rating is substantial. As infrastructure investments/civil works are not envisaged under the
IPF component, the substantial risk rating does not cover risks relating to those activities – which are envisaged under the
PforR. Although the activities supported under the IPF component are expected to generate benefits as result of capacity
building and improved policies/systems and enhanced urban management, there could be risks relating to stakeholder
engagement and social inclusion (e.g., exclusion of vulnerable groups in policy development). Risks of discrimination and
exclusion may be exacerbated in the context of the Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2023 and require enhanced implementation
support and monitoring. Related TORs for the preparation of the national frameworks, corridor design guidelines and
investment packaging tools will be required to be consistent with the requirements of the ESF. An Environmental and
Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be developed by Appraisal for the IPF
component, and Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared by effectiveness

E. Financing
                                          Program Financing (Template)

                              Source                                Amount (US$, Millions)             % of Total

      International Development Association (IDA)                                     540.00                        100%

        IDA Credit                                                                    500.00                     92.59%

        IDA Grant                                                                      40.00                        7.41%

                     Total Program Financing                                          540.00


                                                                                                                        Page 8



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Stephen John Ajalu
 Senior Urban Development Specialist

 Phan Thi Phuong Huyen
 Senior Urban Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Stephen John Ajalu, Phan Thi Phuong Huyen

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Abhas K. Jha                           17-Oct-2025

Country Director:                      Francisca Ayodeji Akala                25-Nov-2025




                                                                                                    Page 9



                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)



                                                                    ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrannexpolicyandresult#doctemplate
Program Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to enhance the institutional performance of selected urban local governments and ministries for urban planning and management and improve
access to climate smart infrastructure, services and jobs for urban residents and displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas.

PDO Indicators by Outcomes


   Baseline                                                                                  Closing Period
   Enhanced institutional capacity of city, municipal and national institutions for urban management
   People in urban areas provided with improved climate smart infrastructure and services
   New and better jobs created in urban areas
   Percentage of participating LGs meeting annual minimum institutional performance benchmarks. (Percentage) DLI
   Mar/2026                                                                                  Dec/2031
   0                                                                                         100
   Percentage of participating central government ministries meeting annual institutional performance benchmarks. (Percentage)


   Direct beneficiaries in urban areas provided with improved living conditions through access to climate smart infrastructure and services (Number) DLI
   Mar/2026                                                                                 Dec/2031
   0                                                                                        5,600,000
   People in urban areas provided with new and better jobs (Number)




Intermediate Indicators by Results Areas

   Baseline                                                                               Closing Period
   Enhanced local and national level government institutional capacity and performance for sustainable urban management
   Increased access to sustainable urban infrastructure, services and jobs


                                                                                                                                         Page 1



                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
  The World Bank
  Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)


New and better jobs created in urban areas and refugees host communities
Program LGs have achieved value for money annual targets in the delivery of sustainable infrastructure investments as assessed by the IVA in annual performance assessment
(Percentage) DLI
Mar/2026                                                                                  Dec/2031
50                                                                                        80
MoLHUD demonstrate enhanced institutional performance for urban/investment planning, coordination & management to support the LGs as assessed by IVA (Percentage) DLI
Mar/2026                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         90
Number of short-term jobs meeting ESHS standards created through Program-financed infrastructure investments (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         2,500
MoLG demonstrate strengthened institutional performance in governance and supporting LGs for decentralized service delivery and OSR mobilization as assessed by an IVA
(Percentage) DLI
Mar/2026                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         90
Program LGs that have successfully met targets set out for O&M systems for all urban major infrastructure (Number) DLI
Mar/2026                                                                                  Dec/2031
21                                                                                        36
Program LGs have strengthened institutional capacity in planning and delivering local climate smart and ESHS compliant investments that transform livelihoods of the host
communities and refugees (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         80
Program LGs have delivered climate smart strategic local economic infrastructure investments which generate employment opportunities (Number) DLI
Mar/2026                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         36
Urban LGs with qualified staff in place demonstrating improved performance in thematic areas as assessed by IVA in APA (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         47
Number of permanent jobs created through urban infrastructure, services, LED facilities and infrastructure (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         5,000
Urban Local Governments with functional O&M systems for all major urban infrastructure as measured by the achievement of annual targets set verified by an IVA (Number) DLI



Number of businesses supported through program-financed LED facilities and infrastructure (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                              Dec/2031
0                                                                                     500


                                                                                                                                  Page 2



                                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)


   Female representation in decision-making committees supported by the Program (Percentage)



   Number of people are trained by the facilities (vocational and skilling training centers) supported by the program. (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                                                    Dec/2031
   0                                                                                           1,000



Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLI)

   Period                                                                                      Period Definition
   Period 1                                                                                    FY 2026/2027
   Period 2                                                                                    FY2027/2028
   Period 3                                                                                    FY2028/2029
   Period 4                                                                                    FY2029/2030
   Period 5                                                                                    FY2030/2031



   Baseline                     Period 1                  Period 2                      Period 3                      Period 4                     Period 5
   1:Program LGs with ISG Plans that meet the minimum required conditions as assessed by the independent verification agent during the annual performance assessment (Yes/No
   )

   0.00
   DLI allocation                                        0.00                        As a % of Total DLI Allocation                          NaN%
   2:MoLHUD demonstrate enhanced institutional performance for urban/investment planning, coordination & management to support the LGs as assessed by IVA (Percentage )

   0.00
   DLI allocation                                              0.00                          As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     NaN%
   3:People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people )

   0.00
   DLI allocation                                               0.00                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     NaN%
     ➢ 3.1:People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people )


                                                                                                                                   Page 3



                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
  The World Bank
  Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)



0.00
DLI allocation                                               0.00                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation                        NaN%
  ➢ 3.2:People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people )

0.00
DLI allocation                                          0.00                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation                             NaN%
4:Percentage of participating LGs meeting annual minimum institutional performance benchmarks. (Percentage )

0.00
DLI allocation                                              0.00                        As a % of Total DLI Allocation                          NaN%
5:Refugees supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods (Number of people )

0.00
DLI allocation                                              0.00                           As a % of Total DLI Allocation                       NaN%
  ➢ 5.1:Refugees supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods - Female (Number of people )

0.00
DLI allocation                                              0.00                           As a % of Total DLI Allocation                       NaN%
  ➢ 5.2:Refugees supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods - Youth (Number of people )

0.00
DLI allocation                                             0.00                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation                       NaN%
6:Program LGs have delivered climate smart strategic local economic infrastructure investments which generate employment opportunities (Number )

0.00
DLI allocation                                          0.00                           As a % of Total DLI Allocation                              NaN%
7:Program LGs have achieved value for money annual targets in the delivery of sustainable infrastructure investments as assessed by the IVA in annual performance assessment
(Percentage )

0.00
DLI allocation                                           0.00                            As a % of Total DLI Allocation                         NaN%
8:People in host communities supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods (Number of people )


                                                                                                                                  Page 4



                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
  The World Bank
  Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)



0.00
DLI allocation                                            0.00                            As a % of Total DLI Allocation                          NaN%
  ➢ 8.1:People in host communities supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods - Female (Number of people )

0.00
DLI allocation                                            0.00                            As a % of Total DLI Allocation                          NaN%
  ➢ 8.2:People in host communities supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods - Youth (Number of people )

0.00
DLI allocation                                             0.00                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation                            NaN%
9:Program LGs that have successfully met targets set out for O&M systems for all urban major infrastructure (Number )

0.00
DLI allocation                                         0.00                        As a % of Total DLI Allocation                              NaN%
10:MoLG demonstrate strengthened institutional performance in governance and supporting LGs for decentralized service delivery and OSR mobilization as assessed by an IVA
(Percentage )

0.00
DLI allocation                                        0.00                           As a % of Total DLI Allocation                            NaN%
11:Urban Local Governments with functional O&M systems for all major urban infrastructure as measured by the achievement of annual targets set verified by an IVA (Number )

0.00
DLI allocation                                             0.00                          As a % of Total DLI Allocation                             NaN%
12:Direct beneficiaries in urban areas provided with improved living conditions through access to climate smart infrastructure and services (Number )

0.00
DLI allocation                                             0.00                          As a % of Total DLI Allocation                           NaN%
  ➢ 12.1:Direct beneficiaries from RHDs (Number )

0.00
DLI allocation                                             0.00                          As a % of Total DLI Allocation                           NaN%
  ➢ 12.2:Female beneficiaries (Number )


                                                                                                                                    Page 5



                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
  The World Bank
  Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) (P511300)



0.00
DLI allocation                                             0.00                          As a % of Total DLI Allocation                             NaN%
13:22. Integrate, enforce, monitor Environmental, Social, Health and Safety (ESHS) provisions in all contracts and impose sanctions for non-performance ( )

0.00
DLI allocation                                             0.00                          As a % of Total DLI Allocation                             NaN%




                                                                                                                                      Page 6



                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
