Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Apr-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01544




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)        Region                         Operation ID                    Operation Name
                                                                                                                         Paraiba Water Security
                                                          LATIN AMERICA AND
                          Brazil                                                         P511557                         Project (Northeast MPA
                                                          CARIBBEAN
                                                                                                                         Phase I)
                          Financing Instrument            Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date         Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                          17-Mar-2026                    28-Sep-2026                     Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                     Implementing Agency
                                                          AESA - State Water
                                                          Resources Management
                                                          Executive Agency - Agência




_For Official Use Only_
                                                          Executiva de Gestão das
                                                          Águas, CAGEPA - State
                          State Government of
                                                          Water and Sanitation
                          Paraiba
                                                          Company - Companhia de
                                                          Água e Esgotos da Paraíba,
                                                          SEIRH - State Secretariat
                                                          for Infrastructure and
                                                          Water Resources

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          To (i) strengthen the foundations for water security in the State; and (ii) increase the access to resilient water services.

                          Components
                          Foundations for Water Security
                          Resilient Water Services
                          Partnership for Water Security and Project Management
                          Front-end fee

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                Yes
                                 The World Bank
                                 Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


                           SUMMARY
                             Total Operation Cost                                                                                             74.67

                             Total Financing                                                                                                  74.67
                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                    50.00
                             Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                  50.00
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                               Counterpart Funding                                                                                           23.00
                                 Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                                                   23.00
                               Commercial Financing                                                                                            1.67




_For Official Use Only_
                                 Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                             1.67




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@ffiprocessing#doctemplate

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Moderate


                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context


                          1. The state of Paraíba, located in Brazil’s Northeast region, spans 56,467 km² with a population of 3,974,687
                             inhabitants, and a demographic density of 70.4 inhabitants per square kilometer (IBGE, 2022). The state accounts
                             for 7.3 percent of the Northeast's population, of which 77.6 percent live in urban areas and 22.4 percent in rural areas
                             (IBGE, 2022). Paraíba faces significant climatic variability: while the coastal capital João Pessoa receives over 1,700
                             mm of annual rainfall, Cabaceiras-known as Brazil's driest municipality-averages only 300 mm (ODC, 2015). Most of
                             the state lies within the semiarid “Polygon of Droughts”, one of the hottest semiarid regions globally, where severe
                                    The World Bank
                                    Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


                               droughts have become increasingly frequent. Since the 1970s, drought recurrence has risen from one event every 4-
                               6 years to one every two years (ODC, 2015), illustrating climate change impacts. These climatic constraints intersect
                               with structural economic challenges: Paraíba ranks among Brazil's poorest states by gross development product (GDP),
                               with an economy centered on agriculture (sugarcane, pineapple, cassava, maize, beans), food and textile industries,
                               livestock, and tourism (ODC, 2015). Climate change–driven droughts have intensified water conflicts, generating
                               significant social and economic impacts.
                          2. Paraíba ranks in terms of GDP in 19th among the 27 Brazilian federative units and 6th within the Northeast region,
                             but in 26th when considering GDP per capita in 2021.1 It has a population of 3,974,687, with a 47.4 percent living in
                             poverty in 2023. The human development index (HDI) in 2021 ranked 21st among the 27 Brazilian federative units.
                             The biome Caatinga dominates the semi-arid region and spans 193 of the state’s 223 municipalities, covering 92
                             percent of its territory, showing greater social vulnerability.
                          3. In Paraíba state, climate change affects the well-being of the population, the economy, and the environment,
                             through increased droughts, floods, and water scarcity risks. Rainfall patterns are a key climatic feature across the
                             state. The semi-arid region is characterized by low and irregular rainfall,2 whereas the coastal region experiences
                             higher precipitation throughout the year. Climate change studies suggest rising temperature extremes, a reduction in
                             average rainfall, and an increase in the number and frequency of dry days.
                           Sectoral and Institutional Context




_For Official Use Only_
                          4. Water resources management is coordinated primarily by the State Secretariat for Infrastructure and Water
                             Resources (SEIRH), supported by the Executive Agency for Water Management of the State of Paraíba (AESA). AESA
                             is responsible for implementing the State Water Resources Policy, including monitoring, allocation, and regulation of
                             water use, as well as the operation of reservoirs and preparation of basin plans.
                          5. In the WSS sector, following the sector legal framework enacted in 2020, the state was divided into four
                             microregions: Alto Piranhas, Litoral, Espinharas, and Borborema. The state-owned utility, CAGEPA, is the main
                             provider, operating in 213 (out of 223) municipalities. CAGEPA serves approximately 2.6 million urban inhabitants
                             with piped water and 1.1 million with sewerage services (SINISA, 2024). CAGEPA’s operations are regulated by the
                             Agência de Regulação do Estado da Paraíba (ARPB), the state-level regulatory agency.
                          6. The João Pessoa Metropolitan Region (RMJP) comprises 12 municipalities with an estimated population of
                             1,380,923. João Pessoa accounts for 64.4 percent of this total and was the fastest-growing capital among Brazil's 20
                             most populous cities, with a 15.3 percent increase over 12 years (IBGE, 2022). RMJP's economy is driven by specialized
                             services and tourism, notably the Cabo Branco Tourist Hub, alongside commerce, public services, sugarcane
                             production, and aquaculture. The region also hosts a major cement/ceramic hub and important industrial districts,
                             strengthening its production base. In 2021, RMJP's GDP reached R$36.3 billion, with services representing 81 percent
                             of the economy and industry contributing R$5.38 billion (IBGE, 2021).
                          7. Despite economic dynamism, RMJP faces major challenges in the provision of WSS services which impair the state’s
                             ability to attract private investors. The water supply system suffers from high non-revenue water (NRW) losses -
                             currently estimated at 45 percent (CAGEPA, 2024) - and growing demand from rapid urban expansion and tourism
                             developments, including resorts and water parks. Sanitation gaps are critical: sewage collection coverage is only 65
                             percent (CAGEPA, 2025). These deficiencies hinder compliance with Brazil’s WSS universalization targets, exacerbate
                             environmental pollution, pose risks to public health and ecosystems, and hinders economic development.

                          1 IBGE.
                          2 In the Semi-arid region, average annual rainfall ranges from 330 to 1,000 mm. This rainfall is concentrated within a short ‘winter’ season, which

                          rarely exceeds four months per year (generally occurring between January and May in the westernmost areas of the Semi-arid region of Paraíba, and
                          somewhat later in the more eastern parts of this region). The dry season, or ‘summer’, is very pronounced in this area.
                                 The World Bank
                                 Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


                          8. In rural Paraíba, access to safe and reliable water remains extremely limited. Approximately 60 percent of the
                             population lacks continuous potable water supply. Rural households also require water for productive uses such as
                             livestock and small-scale irrigation.
                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           9. To (i) strengthen the foundations for water security in the State; and (ii) increase the access to resilient water
                              services.

                            Key Results


                                  PDO #1. Strengthen the foundations for water security in the State.
                                  •   Indicator 1. People with enhanced resilience to climate risks - scorecard indicator. Standard sub-indicator:
                                      people benefiting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance.
                                  •   Indicator 2. Water resources management instruments strengthened.




_For Official Use Only_
                                  •   Indicator 3. Number of policies, programs, or investments informed by regional engagement through the
                                      Consortium.
                                  PDO #2. Increase the access to resilient water services.
                                  •   Indicator 4. People provided with water, sanitation and/or hygiene, of which 100% is safely managed
                                      (disaggregated by gender, and youth) -scorecard indicator.
                                  •   Indicator 5. People with enhanced resilience to climate risks - scorecard indicator. Standard sub-indicator:
                                      people benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure.
                                  •   Indicator 6. Volume of pollution loads (BOD) discharges reduced in water bodies in the RMJP (tons per year).
                            D. Project Description
                          10. The Paraiba Water Security Project will constitute the first phase of the Integrated Water Security Program for the
                              Northeast of Brazil MPA. On March 27, 2025, the Committee for External Financing (COFIEX) approved the State of
                              Paraíba's request for a new water project. The Project's design aligns with the Theory of Change, PrDOs, and structure
                              of the MPA.
                          11. The Project will focus on activities prioritized by the State Government to ensure the highest impact and
                              complement other on-going activities. In this sense, the Project will seek to: (i) continue building the state’s
                              foundations for water security, which remains underdeveloped in light of its economic development ambitions and a
                              rapidly changing climate; (ii) enable the State’s on-going initiative to achieving universal urban sanitation services
                              through a public private partnership (PPP), by building critical, prerequisite wastewater infrastructure and supporting
                              the regulatory agency; (iii) improve the resilience of the urban water services by building critical infrastructure and
                              improving the efficiency of the current operator, and (iv) build the State’s initial capacity to sustainably improve rural
                              water and sanitation services.
                          12. The Project will lay the groundwork for a PPP to expand sanitation services in the Coastal and Alto Piranhas
                              Microregions. To advance Brazil's sanitation universalization targets, the State Government and CAGEPA have
                              prepared a PPP covering two microregions and benefiting about 2 million urban residents across 85 municipalities.
                              Investments financed under the Project -particularly the WWTP- and the ongoing World Bank-financed operation (see
                                  The World Bank
                                  Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


                              next paragraphs) are critical to ensuring PPP viability. BNDES conducted technical, economic, and financial
                              assessments for the bidding process launched in March 2026. CAGEPA engaged the Getúlio Vargas Foundation (FGV)
                              to support bid preparation, contract mobilization, and strengthen contract management. The Project will contribute
                              to reinforce the state regulator's capacity for oversight and compliance with PPP best practices.
                          13. The Project will finance critical infrastructure to close service gaps on drinking water in the RMJP, creating an
                              enabling environment to meet growing population and economic demands. The proposed investments include the
                              rehabilitation and expansion of the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP), sectorization of the water supply
                              distribution system, and the construction of a water transmission main for the Gramame system.
                          14. The Project builds on lessons from the ongoing Paraiba Improving Water Resources Management and Services
                              Provision Project (Projeto de Seguranca Hídrica or PSH by its acronym in Portuguese)3 approved in 2019. The PSH
                              includes the construction of water mains to transfer water from PISF to 27 municipalities in the regions in Agreste and
                              Borborema, automation and partial sectorization of RMJP's water network to reduce NRW, improvements in
                              wastewater collection for energy efficiency, and institutional strengthening of CAGEPA.
                          Project Components
                          15. Component 1. Foundations for Water Security (US$4.30 million: US$3.50 million provided by IBRD; US$0.80 million
                              in counterpart funding). This component aims to strengthen proactive, climate-resilient WRM in Paraíba. It will build
                              the state's capacity to address climate change–driven droughts and floods through enhanced monitoring and early




_For Official Use Only_
                              warning systems, enabling timely and effective responses. Improved monitoring will inform decision-making by water
                              users, civil society, and public authorities on water allocation, resource management, and preparedness for extreme
                              events. This component is aligned with Pillar 1 of the Integrated Water Security Program for the Northeast MPA.
                          16. Component 2. Resilient Water Services (US$70.17 million: US$46.30 million provided by IBRD; US$23.87 million in
                              counterpart funding). This component is designed to advance the modernization and expansion of WSS, supporting
                              the state water utility (CAGEPA), the state regulatory agency (ARPB), and a recently created unit that will lead the
                              development of a strategy and plan to support rural WSS in the state, the Gerencia Executiva de Saneamento Rural
                              (GESR). This component also includes: the construction of a transmission main connected to the Gramame System to
                              expand the water supply system in the RJMP, the Gramame system comprises three existing dams, the Marés Dam,
                              the Gramame and Mamuaba dams. The component also involves the construction and optimization of selected water
                              supply network sectors to reduce physical water losses in CAGEPA’s distribution network in the RMJP; and the
                              improvement and expansion of the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) of the RMJP located in the area of Baixo
                              Paraiba. This component is aligned with Pillar 2 of the Integrated Water Security Program for the Northeast.
                          17. Component 3. Partnership for Water Security and Project Management (US$0.20 million financed by IBRD). This
                              component will fund knowledge sharing and learning activities between the Borrower and other States in areas of
                              interest for dissemination of best practices. This component will also provide support to strengthening the technical
                              and administrative capacity of the PMU (Unidade de Gerenciamento do Projeto) with respect to technical, financial
                              management, audit, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, social and environmental, and communication and
                              information technology activities, including through the hiring of consultants. Activities will include the provision of
                              independent audit services to ensure effective project implementation, monitoring, and compliance with fiduciary
                              requirements.
                          18. Project estimated cost. The estimated cost is US$74.67 million, to be financed with a US$ 50 million IBRD loan,
                              US$23.00 million is co-financing from the State Government of Paraiba, and US$1.67 from unguaranteed commercial
                              financing. The proposed lending instrument is an IPF to be implemented over a six-year period. The Borrower will be
                              the State Government of Paraíba. Project costs are presented in Table 1 below.


                          3 The Paraiba Improving Water Resources Management and Services Provision Project, P165683
                                 The World Bank
                                 Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


                                                   Table 1. Project Costs and Source of Financing (amounts in US$ thousands)
                                                 Component                        Project cost    IBRD Loan     State of Paraiba     Commercial
                                                                                                                    funding           financing
                               Component 1: Foundations for Water Security           4.30           3.50              0.80               0.00
                               Component 2: Resilient Water Services                 70.17          46.30            22.20               1.67
                               Component 3: Partnership for Water Security           0.20           0.20              0.00               0.00
                               and Project Management
                                                    Total                            74.67          50.00            23.00               1.67

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                              Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                             No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                       No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




_For Official Use Only_
                          19. This Project builds on previous efforts to strengthen WRM and improve WSS services in the RMJP. Activities mirror
                              the on-going project, leveraging lessons learned for improved environmental management. All works will occur in
                              urban or peri-urban areas, avoiding sensitive zones and significant biodiversity threats. Construction ranges from
                              simple to moderately complex, with the WWTP work expected to last about 18 months. Impacts are projected to be
                              local, temporary, and manageable, with no cumulative negative effects. The WWTP rehabilitation and expansion is
                              expected to improve mangrove health but could alter how local populations use the ecosystem. WWTP design and
                              procurement should adhere to strict environmental standards, national regulations, NASs, and requirements for
                              effluent, sludge management, mangrove protection, and dam safety. The Borrower has agreed with the Bank on an
                              Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), which outlines key actions to address environmental and social
                              issues, including the update of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the WWTP, the preparation
                              of an independent assessment for the Gramame, Mamuaba and Marés dams, the incorporation of the
                              recommendations from the independent dam safety assessment into dam safety plans and the conclusion of the dam
                              safety plans in accordance with ESS4, the BESF and World Bank dam safety best practices.
                          20. While the Project aims to improve living conditions and environmental quality it carries potential for some social
                              impacts. The rehabilitation of the WWTP and water infrastructure will require land acquisition. These impacts are
                              addressed in the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), prepared in the previous operation, which covers 49 PAPs/areas
                              including households with residents, land occupants, economic activities, workers and service providers. Cadaster,
                              consultation, and pre-negotiation have already been conducted with PAPs. The RAP has already received the Bank’s
                              No Objection and must be implemented before this new Project begins. The Bank will monitor its implementation
                              through the ongoing Project. Commitments to preparing a RAP Implementation Report have been included in the
                              ESCP. Risks related to community health and safety during construction and operation of the WWTP will be managed
                              via the C-ESMPs. Other expected social risks, such as community health and safety issues -including road closures,
                              traffic management, waste handling, SEA/SH, and disruptions during the construction and operation of the WWTP-
                              will be managed through C-ESMPs, codes of conduct, worker training, community education programs, grievance
                              mechanisms, contractor oversight, and specific health and safety protocols. Most contractors for the civil works will
                              be local, so labor influx risk will be low. Vulnerable groups are unlikely to experience social exclusion, as the Project
                              includes outreach activities about benefits like social tariffs, detailed in the SEP disclosed during planning, plus robust
                              stakeholder engagement from the ongoing project.
                                  The World Bank
                                  Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)




                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements


                          1. The State of Paraíba will be the Borrower for the proposed operation, with the Federative Republic of Brazil
                             providing a sovereign guarantee. The Project Management Unit (PMU), currently responsible for implementing the
                             PSH, will also oversee the implementation of the new Project. The PMU is composed of three technical coordination
                             teams, each reporting to a different implementing agency with specific responsibilities:
                              •   SEIRH: Responsible for overall Project supervision and management, as well as the implementation of studies and
                                  activities related to the safety of dams under Component 2.

                              •   AESA: Responsible for the management and supervision of water resources activities under Component 1.

                              •   CAGEPA: Responsible for the management and supervision of Component 2 activities, excluding those under
                                  SEIRH’s responsibility.




_For Official Use Only_
                          2. Procurement processes will be centralized at the PMU/SEIRH, while contract management will be decentralized to
                             the other implementing agencies. Financial management will also be centralized within the PMU/SEIRH. The
                             implementation of social and environmental safeguards will be decentralized: Component 1 will be managed by
                             PMU/SEIRH, while Component 2 by PMU/CAGEPA. The PMU/SEIRH will remain responsible for overall safeguards
                             compliance, legal matters, and will include a dedicated M&E specialist. All this will follow a similar practice to the
                             current PSH which has yielded good results.
                          3. The Borrower, through SEIRH, shall cause AESA and CAGEPA to hire or designate a Focal Point with functions and
                             resources acceptable to the Bank, as further detailed in the Project Operations Manual (POM), and thereafter
                             maintain said Focal Point throughout Project implementation.
                          4. The Borrower, through SEIRH, shall enter into (a) a Cooperation Agreement with AESA, for the implementation of
                             Component 1, and (b) a Cooperation Agreement with CAGEPA, for the implementation of Component 2
                             (‘Cooperation Agreements’), in each case under terms and conditions acceptable to the Bank, and thereafter maintain
                             said Cooperation Agreements throughout Project implementation. No Bank proceed will be transferred to these
                             entities.
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Alfonso Alvestegui
                             Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            State Government of Paraiba




                                                                                                                                               Page 1
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


                          Implementing Agencies
                           AESA - State Water Resources Management Executive Agency - Agência Executiva de Gestão das Águas

                           CAGEPA - State Water and Sanitation Company - Companhia de Água e Esgotos da Paraíba

                           SEIRH - State Secretariat for Infrastructure and Water Resources

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL




_For Official Use Only_
                          Task Team Leader(s):                    Alfonso Alvestegui

                          Co- Team Leader(s):                     Paula Pedreira de Freitas de Oliveira

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:               David Michaud                           23-Jan-2026

                          Country/Division Director:              Jorge A. Coarasa                        23-Apr-2026




                                                                                                                              Page 2
