Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01538




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                                                    Sri Lanka Regional
                                                                                                                    Empowerment through
                          Sri Lanka                      SOUTH ASIA                   P511605
                                                                                                                    Vibrant, Inclusive, and
                                                                                                                    Viable Economies
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         15-Dec-2025                  31-Mar-2026                   Urban, Resilience and Land
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Ministry of Transport,
                          Democratic Socialist
                                                         Highways and Urban
                          Republic of Sri Lanka




_For Official Use Only_
                                                         Development

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          To improve access to enabling infrastructure and promote local jobs in selected sites of Northern and Eastern
                          Provinces.

                          Components
                          Component 1. Improving Regional Economic Planning and Strengthening Institutional Capacity
                          Component 2. Catalytic Investments and Promoting Private Participation
                          Component 3. Project Management
                          Component 4. Contingent Emergency Response

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                           100.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                                100.00



                                                                                                                                              Page 1



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                     The World Bank
                                     Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                                               of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                                                    100.00
                                 Financing Gap                                                                                                                                          0.00

                              DETAILS
                                 World Bank Group Financing
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                                      100.00
                                      IDA Credit                                                                                                                                    100.00




                              @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial




_For Official Use Only_
                              Decision
                              The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                              B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context
                          1. Sri Lanka is entering a period of cautious but measurable recovery following several years of economic contraction.
                             After a cumulative 9.7 percent GDP decline between 2021–2023, early stabilization measures and structural reforms
                             have helped restore confidence, with GDP rebounding by an estimated 5 percent in 20241, signaling the first growth
                             since the crisis. Tourism has accelerated, remittances remain resilient, and inflation has moderated from double digits
                             to single-digit levels. While these gains provide a platform for deeper reforms, vulnerabilities remain. Extreme poverty
                             increased from less than 1 percent in 2019 to over 5 percent in 20232, nearly one-third of the population remains poor
                             or at risk of falling into poverty, and labor force participation has fallen from 52.3 percent in 2019 to 48.6 percent in
                             20243. Sustained recovery will require shifting toward productivity-led growth and private-sector investment, with a
                             deliberate focus on regions that have lagged behind.
                          2. Sri Lanka’s spatial and economic geography is marked by regional inequalities. Only 18 percent of the population
                             lives in urban areas—one of the lowest rates in Asia—limiting the agglomeration benefits required for diversified
                             growth. Economic activity and urbanization remain heavily concentrated in the Western Province, which contributes
                             44 percent of national GDP, while the Northern and Eastern Provinces account for only 4 percent and 5 percent,
                             respectively 4 . Both the Northern and Eastern Provinces face higher poverty rates 5 , skills deficits, and weak

                          1
                              World Bank Sri Lanka Development Update (Apr 2025)
                          2 World Bank Sri Lanka Development Update (Apr 2025)
                          3 Sri Lanka Socio-economic data 2024. Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

                          4 The Central Bank of Sri Lanka (2024) “Provincial Gross Domestic Product (PGDP)- 2023”, The Statistics Department
                          5 In 2019, poverty rates in the Northern and Eastern provinces were at 23.8 and 18.6 percent respectively, well above the national average of 14.3 percent. Source:

                          Department of Census and Statistics (2022) “Poverty indicators – 2019” Ministry of Economic Policies and Plan Implementation.


                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 2



                                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                                infrastructure compared to their regional peers, reflecting decades of conflict and underinvestment. Unemployment
                                and underemployment remain elevated, particularly among youth and women, while private-sector presence is weak
                                and concentrated in low-value activities.
                          3. Developing Northern and Eastern Provinces holds significant potential for job creation, poverty reduction, and
                             attracting private investment. Together, they encompass nearly two-thirds of Sri Lanka’s coastline, contain some of
                             the country’s most distinctive cultural and natural tourism assets, and support more than 30% of workforce working
                             across fisheries, agriculture, and related value chains. Unlocking regional potential will require strategic planning and
                             investments informed by priority regional value chain needs. In parallel, a focus on boosting service delivery and
                             livability in emerging urban centers such as Jaffna- will enhance regional competitiveness and help narrow long-
                             standing structural disparities. Such an approach aligns with the strategic direction set by the Government of Sri
                             Lanka’s (GoSL) National Physical Planning Policy and Plan (2017–2050) and the National Planning Framework (2025-
                             2030), which call for strengthening regional growth centers, enhancing connectivity through development corridors,
                             and enabling spatially balanced, jobs-led growth.
                              Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          4. GoSL has reaffirmed its commitment to Northen and Eastern Provinces by channeling resources to strategic regional
                             programs and investments under the 2025 Citizen’s Budget 6. Notable focus is on improved service delivery and
                             regional connectivity (especially air), boosted tourism and enhanced productivity of fisheries, agricultural and their




_For Official Use Only_
                             allied industries. The commitment is in line with sector policies and plans. For instance, the National Tourism Strategic
                             Plan 2026–2030, the National Mariculture Policy being formulated by the Ministry of Fisheries, Aquatic and Ocean
                             Resources, and the National Agriculture Policy, among others.
                          5. Tourism offers an underutilized opportunity to drive growth and boost jobs in the Northern and Eastern Provinces,
                             while establishing a pathway to ensure sustainable utilization of the region’s rich biodiversity and natural assets.
                             Together, the provinces host more than 60 percent of Sri Lanka’s coastline, a diverse portfolio of nature-based,
                             cultural, and historic assets, strong overseas diaspora linkages and proximity to regional markets such as southern
                             India. Yet both provinces attract less than 5 percent of international tourists to Sri Lanka and 6 percent of domestic
                             tourists7, largely concentrated within few months annually.8 Poor regional connectivity and last-mile access to tourist
                             destinations, inadequate basic service delivery (water supply, drainage, solid waste management etc.), weak tourist
                             infrastructure, limited diversification, branding and promotion of tourism offerings continue to limit the visitor
                             experience and reduce the length of stay.9
                          6. The Government’s new Sri Lanka Tourism Strategic Plan 2026–2030 is being prepared through a nationwide,
                             province-level consultative process to ensure that tourism development is tailored to each province’s unique assets
                             and constraints. The plan prioritizes diversification away from mass beach tourism toward nature-based, cultural,
                             heritage, and marine tourism, and highlights the need for improved connectivity to unlock the tourism potential of
                             lagging regions. Building on the ambitious national target announced in the President’s Budget Speech, of achieving
                             US$8 billion in tourism revenue by 2030, the Sri Lanka Tourism Development Authority (SLTDA) has underscored the
                             importance of shifting from volume-driven mass tourism to higher-value tourism, noting that current yield per visitor
                             remains far below potential.


                          6 Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic development
                          7 Surbana Jurong (2024) “Eastern Province Tourism Master Plan”
                          8
                            The average duration of stay of international tourists in Sri Lanka is around 8.5 days, whereas in the key destinations in Eastern Province it is only about 3–4 days.
                          Surbana Jurong (2025). Eastern Province Tourism Master Plan
                          9
                            Domestic tourism has grown in recent years, but low-value, short-stay travel dominates due to limited amenities and lack of structured destination development,
                          for instance, in Arugam Bay.


                                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



                                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                          7. Unlocking tourism potential in the Northern and Eastern Provinces will require coordinated investments in basic
                             infrastructure, reliable services, alongside targeted destination development. Limited regional connectivity and long
                             travel times by road constrain access to high-potential regional destinations. Limited basic service provision is an
                             additional bottleneck. For instance, only 19 percent of households in the Northern Province have a safely managed
                             water supply (vs. 60 percent nationally), and access in the Eastern Province remains well below national standards. In
                             Pottuvil, which services Arugam Bay tourism, hotels face peak-season water shortages, while coastal destinations such
                             as Jaffna, Arugam Bay and Passikuda struggle with inadequate capacity of the local authorities for solid waste
                             management, reducing competitiveness for higher-value tourism. Past investments in the high potential hubs have
                             been fragmented and sector-specific, with weak institutional capacity and limited medium term spatial planning
                             further curtailing impact. A consolidated, spatially targeted program is therefore essential to improve basic services
                             and strengthen destination competitiveness.
                          8. Beyond tourism, agriculture and fisheries remain the backbone of the Northern and Eastern provincial economies,
                             sustaining one-third of the workforce 10 and serving as the primary source of livelihoods for 65 percent of the
                             population11. The Eastern Province contributes a quarter of Sri Lanka’s national paddy output, while the Northern
                             Province has strong potential for high-value crops and diversified agriculture12. Yet despite their economic importance,
                             these sectors remain constrained by structural bottlenecks. These include inadequate onshore facilities that hinder
                             hygienic fish handling and contribute to significant post-harvest losses, limited value addition at-source, and poor last-
                             mile and regional connectivity that restrict efficient market access. These constraints depress producer incomes,




_For Official Use Only_
                             inhibit private sector investment, and limit the broader growth and employment potential of agriculture and fisheries
                             in both provinces.
                          9. Modern processing and cold-chain capacity in the Northern and Eastern Provinces is extremely limited, with most
                             value-addition concentrated in Colombo and other Western Province hubs. As a result, agricultural and fisheries
                             produce must be transported long distances for processing, reducing producer margins and increasing post-harvest
                             losses. In the East, Cod Bay in Trincomalee is the only reasonably functional harbor, yet its onshore facilities remain
                             inadequate and unhygienic. Although state land is available and investor interest exists, the absence of a strategic
                             master plan and limited government capacity to engage the private sector have prevented the establishment of
                             processing facilities. These constraints weaken local value chains, limit competitiveness, and deter private investment
                             across both sectors.
                          10. Climate and disaster risks further compound the structural constraints facing the Northern and Eastern Provinces,
                              posing a growing threat to their long-term economic viability. Sri Lanka’s northern and eastern coastlines, including
                              Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Trincomalee, Batticaloa, and Ampara, are among the most exposed in the country to sea-level rise,
                              coastal flooding, shoreline erosion, storm surges, and salinity intrusion, as highlighted by the recent impacts of Cyclone
                              Ditwah. Low-lying districts in the Eastern Province face some of the country’s highest flood risks, exacerbated by
                              inadequate drainage and poor urban water management. These hazards directly undermine productive value chains
                              across tourism, agriculture, and fisheries. Coastal erosion threatens beaches and visitor infrastructure, while rising sea
                              temperatures and habitat degradation reduces the resilience of marine ecosystems. Extreme heat in the Northern
                              Province is projected to lower household incomes by up to 10 percent by 205013 and decline the living standards and
                              tourism appeal of cities like Jaffna. Without climate-resilient enabling infrastructure, resilient urban services, and
                              support for diversification of climate-affected livelihoods (especially fisheries), these vulnerabilities will continue to
                              erode competitiveness and deter private investment. A shift toward value-chain-aligned, climate-resilient coastal and


                          10 Department of Census and Statistics. Sri Lanka Labor Force Survey, Annual Report-2023
                          11 Integrated Rapid Development Plans, prepared by two provincial governments.
                          12 Integrated Rapid Development Plans, prepared by two provincial governments.
                          13 World Bank (2021) Sri Lanka Climate Risk Country Profile




                                                                                                                                                    Page 4



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                               urban regeneration is therefore essential to safeguard existing assets, unlock the region’s long-term economic
                               potential and attract private investment.
                          11. Private sector engagement in the Northern and Eastern Provinces remains markedly low, reflecting long-standing
                              structural and institutional constraints that have limited investor presence. According to the World Bank’s Country
                              Private Sector Diagnostic (2022), only about 2 percent of formal firms operate in the Northern Province and less than
                              4 percent in the Eastern Province, compared to more than 60 percent in the Western Province. 14 This imbalance is
                              mirrored in the distribution of Public–Private Partnerships (PPP): although Sri Lanka has completed nearly 179 PPP
                              projects worth US$5.3 billion, the vast majority are concentrated in the Western and Southern regions.15 Post-conflict
                              recovery challenges, weak enabling infrastructure, unresolved land issues, and limited institutional capacity to
                              structure and manage partnerships continue to undermine investor confidence. As a result, the two provinces remain
                              heavily dependent on public financing. Prioritizing public investments that directly address these constraints by
                              strengthening enabling infrastructure, improving institutional readiness for PPPs, and de-risking entry into key value
                              chains, will be essential to crowd in private capital and unlock sustained economic growth in the Northern and Eastern
                              Provinces.
                          12. In response to the Government’s request, the World Bank Group has committed to financing a Series of Projects
                              (SOP) to catalyze private sector activation, create jobs and enhance regional competitiveness in the Northern and
                              Eastern Provinces. Recognizing the scale and complexity of regional transformation, the SOP is structured as a two-
                              phase series spanning 8 years, allowing for: (i) progressive integration and strengthening of economic sectors and




_For Official Use Only_
                              value chains, (ii) expansion of investments with private sector mobilization and (iii) replication of the approach with
                              institutional capacity building. This PAD presents the first operation in the program—REVIVE SOP1 (US$100 million,
                              FY2026–2031)—which will finance strategic regional development planning, foundational and climate-resilient
                              infrastructure, and targeted service delivery improvements in selected high-economic potential areas. SOP1 will
                              deploy site-specific, value-chain-informed interventions aimed at removing binding bottlenecks and crowding in
                              private investment, while also supporting institutional strengthening and the preparation of investment-ready
                              subprojects for subsequent phases. The REVIVE SOP2 is expected to build on SOP1 diagnostics and foundational
                              investments, with a stronger focus on deepening priority agriculture and fisheries value chains, subject to Government
                              endorsement. The tourism value chain will be further integrated with a parallel Tourism MPA (Tourism for Heritage,
                              Resilience, Inclusion, and Value-driven Employment Program; THRIVE). The first phase of THRIVE (1, Colombo) aims to
                              support the national government (in addition to Colombo based investments) on national data collection, branding
                              and promotion of destinations, which will complement and augment activities under REVIVE SOP1. The second phase,
                              THRIVE (2, Nature) will likely further build upon REVIVE SOP1.


                                 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                               Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           13. To improve access to enabling infrastructure and promote local jobs in selected sites of Northern and Eastern
                               Provinces.

                                 Key Results




                          14 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099537108052210728/pdf/IDU0542219930fd3b0484b09a88096bd1a1066e9.pdf
                          15 https://ppp.worldbank.org/country-profile-sri-lanka




                                                                                                                                                       Page 5



                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                          14. SOP1 will boost access to climate-resilient infrastructure, unlock economic opportunities and create jobs, and lay
                              the foundation for private sector engagement. Key activities include regional development planning and institutional
                              strengthening, investment in infrastructure, and support to local enterprises.

                          15. The key PDO level results indicators include:
                              (i) People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number, disaggregated by women and youth) (Corporate
                              Results Indicator)
                              (ii) People with more and better jobs (Number, disaggregated by women and youth) (Corporate Results Indicator)

                             D. Project Description

                          16. SOP1 will support a coordinated set of interventions within the selected high-economic potential areas (hereafter,
                              clusters), anchored in a specific productive sector. Clusters have been selected through a three-stage process (see
                              more details in Section IV): (i) a rapid assessment of high economic potential zones using an Economic Potential Index
                              (EPI); (ii) applying the EPI filter to the proposals from provincial and national governments based on their existing
                              development plans to generate a long list of 15 clusters; (iii) from the long-list of 15 clusters, prioritization of five
                              clusters for initial physical investments based on their potential for private sector activation, jobs related impact, and
                              readiness.




_For Official Use Only_
                          17. Under SOP1, five clusters have been prioritized for physical investments at appraisal: (i) Jaffna Fort and the
                              surrounding city area, (ii) the Guru Nagar coastal fisheries neighborhood, (iii) the Cod Bay fisheries harbor, (iv) the
                              Passikuda tourist town, and (v) Arugam Bay (see Annex 2 for further details). In addition to these five clusters, two
                              proposed investments—Kokilai Bridge and the Outer Islands in Jaffna—will receive support for preparatory studies to
                              enhance their readiness for future implementation.
                          18. To optimize WBG support to the Northern and Eastern Provinces beyond SOP1, five additional clusters from the
                              long list have been identified as potentially eligible for support under ongoing or pipeline WBG operations and
                              technical assistance. These include: (i) the Ampara dairy cluster under the Inclusive Connectivity Development Project
                              (ICDP; P176164); (ii) the Kilinochchi and Nilaveli/Kuchchaveli water supply clusters, supported through water-sector
                              technical assistance on public–private partnerships; (iii) tourism development in Mannar under the pipeline Nature-
                              Based Tourism Project (THRIVE 2 – Nature); and (iv) agribusiness investments under the Integrated Rurban
                              Development and Climate Resilience Project (Rurban; P505241).
                          19. Joint preparation with IFC has strengthened the identification of opportunities to unlock downstream private sector
                              investment and catalyze IFC priorities in the intervention clusters, thus enabling a unified WBG offering to the
                              government. These include: (i) aviation connectivity assessments (Northern and Eastern Provinces) and selected
                              feasibility studies 16 ; (ii) potential private partnerships investments related to fish processing facilities in Cod Bay
                              cluster will likely be further leveraged for downstream mariculture or aquaculture investments; and (iii) project
                              facilitated matchmaking of opportunities for medium and large cap firms via a Northern Province carve-out of the
                              national Entrepreneurship Fund under development by IFC.
                          20. Project interventions will comprise a set of inter-linked components and activities, aimed at: (i) improving regional
                              economic planning and strengthening institutional capacity for sustained development; (ii) financing catalytic public
                              infrastructure investments to attract private investments in selected clusters; and (iii) supporting local enterprises in



                          16 based on ongoing discussions with the Civil Aviation Authority of Sri Lanka (CAASL), and the Airport and Aviation Services Sri Lanka Private Limited (AASL)




                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 6



                                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                              the selected clusters through business development and skills enhancement to strengthen the value chains and
                              stimulate private sector.
                          21. Component 1. Improving Regional Economic Planning and Strengthening Institutional Capacity (US$5 million) will
                              be implemented by the MoTHUD in consultation with the provinces and will finance technical assistance, consultancy
                              and non-consulting services, goods, and equipment to strengthen regional planning capacity and guide long-term
                              economic development in the Northern and Eastern Provinces. The component will enhance the institutional capacity
                              of national and provincial entities to manage integrated, climate-resilient, and private-sector-responsive
                              development.
                          22. The component will support the development and implementation of a strategic Regional Economic Development
                              Plan (RDP). The RDP will identify policies, priority actions, and institutional requirements for effective integrated
                              regional economic planning, and for the development of the region and its key economic corridors. It will identify
                              priority climate-smart infrastructure investments aimed at strengthening regional resilience and mitigating the
                              impacts of climate change, strategic environmental and social instruments, and financing modalities (including
                              potential public–private partnerships) over a 10-year horizon. Value-chain diagnostics in key sectors—such as tourism,
                              fisheries, and agriculture—will inform the RDP by identifying opportunities and constraints to regional
                              competitiveness within the dominant productive sectors. The RDP will also contribute to preparing a National
                              Development Plan, under consideration by the Ministry of Finance (MoF).




_For Official Use Only_
                          23. The component will also support capacity building for relevant national line ministries, the Northern and Eastern
                              Provincial Councils, and local governments to enhance coordination, strengthen their capacity for regional economic
                              planning and climate-resilient investments, improve operations and management (O&M) of assets created under the
                              project, and foster collaboration with the private sector. It will also support knowledge-sharing and exposure visits for
                              officials and project staff to learn from global best practices in regional development planning, including climate
                              change adaptation and mitigation strategies and job-led growth.
                          24. In addition, the component will finance preparatory studies and transaction advisory to support the preparation of
                              priority investments that will enhance the region’s connectivity and competitiveness, positioning them for
                              successful implementation in future. It will include, inter alia, (i) feasibility studies and potential transaction advisory
                              services for air connectivity, noting that air connectivity is a binding constraint for exports and tourism; (ii) Scoping
                              studies, including design options analysis and E&S screening for Kokilai-Pulmodai connectivity, linking the Northern
                              Province to the Eastern Province; and (iii) sustainability and feasibility assessment for eco-tourism investments such
                              as in the Jaffna outer islands or other fragile ecosystems with tourism potential in Northern and Eastern provinces,
                              which can unlock tourism potential in a sustainable way. Selected priority investments and interventions identified
                              under RDP may also receive preparatory assessments and transaction advisory support under the component.
                          25. Component 2: Catalytic Investments and Promoting Private Participation (US$90 million) will finance infrastructure
                              investments in priority clusters, with the aim of activating the private sector and promoting economic growth. It will
                              support: (i) integrated packages of infrastructure, service delivery, and site improvements in the clusters; and (iii) local
                              economic development, targeting firms and businesses in the clusters, to stimulate private sector and job creation.
                          26. Sub-component 2.1 Climate-resilient Infrastructure and Site Improvements (US$82 million) will be implemented by
                              MoTHUD in consultation with the provinces and relevant national Ministries, and finance inter alia, consultancy
                              services, feasibility studies, detailed designs, civil works, management and supervision of works, goods and equipment
                              for integrated package of area-based investments in climate-resilient infrastructure, site improvements, and service
                              delivery across priority clusters to strengthen key economic activities and stimulate job creation. It will also promote
                              private sector participation in the selected clusters. Key activities include:



                                                                                                                                                     Page 7



                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                             (i) Tourism and cultural heritage enhancement: Upgrading cultural and touristic sites in selected clusters through
                                 façade restoration, adaptive reuse of spaces and buildings, improved pedestrian pathways, shaded seating, parking
                                 rehabilitation, streetscaping, waterfront and beachfront parks, access roads, lighting, green spaces, night markets,
                                 and tourist amenities such as information centers, bike lanes, and vendor areas.
                             (ii) Fisheries infrastructure upgrading: Improving onshore facilities, including hygienic landing, handling, and sorting
                                  areas, auction halls, markets and food stalls, waste management systems, access roads, and lighting within existing
                                  harbor footprint to enhance economic productivity.
                             (iii) Urban regeneration and service delivery improvements: Upgrading enabling urban infrastructure including roads,
                                   drainage, water supply systems, and solid waste management—to improve connectivity, resilience, and the
                                   reliability of services for residents, firms, and visitors.
                             (iv) Auxiliary or supplementary infrastructure investments that need priority support in two provinces.
                          27. Collectively, these investments will enhance tourist experience, extend visitor stays and spending, and improve the
                              efficiency and safety of key economic activities, contributing to more livable, resilient, and economically vibrant
                              clusters.
                          28. Rehabilitation and construction of infrastructure and site improvements will integrate disaster risks, climate
                              adaptation, and mitigation measures. It will include energy efficiency improvements, considerations for reducing




_For Official Use Only_
                              waste, using local and low-carbon materials, and enhancing water use efficiency. The expansion of green spaces and
                              public parks will help manage the effects of climate change: for example, absorbing excess rainwater and reducing
                              runoff to manage stormwater, lowering temperatures, improving air quality, and helping conserve biodiversity and
                              environmental ecosystems. Infrastructure and services will be assessed for disaster and climate risks and will integrate
                              improvements to strengthen sustainability and resilience. All project-supported infrastructure, where feasible, will
                              integrate gender-responsive and safety-enhancing measures.
                          29. The sub-component will also promote PPPs through the assessment, design, preparation, and implementation of
                              potentially viable transactions. It will finance public infrastructure to attract private investments in the clusters,
                              where private sector entities are willing to invest but require complementary public infrastructure to make their
                              investment viable. Preliminary market sounding has indicated potential PPP opportunities in Jaffna Fort (heritage area
                              activation), water supply provision in Arugam Bay, and fish processing facilities at Cod Bay Harbor. Final selection of
                              PPP investments will be based on feasibility studies and consultations with both public and private stakeholders,
                              initiated under the Grant Facility for Project Preparation (GFPP).
                          30. Sub-component 2.2 Support for local enterprises, investment promotion and destination development (US$8
                              million) will be implemented by the Northern and Eastern Provincial Councils (PCs) in collaboration with local
                              governments. It will finance technical assistance, consulting and non-consulting services, small works, goods, and
                              equipment to strengthen local economic development at the cluster level. Activities under this component will also
                              leverage and align with the overarching national-level support under THRIVE 1 (P511828) for strengthening
                              destination development, promotion and management. Key activities under sub-component 2.2 will include the
                              following:
                          31. Support for local enterprises and investment promotion will strengthen the capacity of enterprises operating within
                              priority clusters and enable greater private participation. The sub-component will finance value chain assessments to
                              identify productivity gaps, skills need, and investment opportunities, as well as specialized economic and market
                              studies to inform private-sector-enabling measures. Activities will include: (i) market positioning and destination-level
                              planning to promote site-specific investments, including O&M strategies and activation of visitor sites; (ii) market-
                              informed capacity building and skills training for tourism enterprises, fisheries workers, firms, and cooperatives; and


                                                                                                                                                   Page 8



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                              (iii) identification and provision of tailored business development support—including tourism product development,
                              branding, adoption of digital solutions, and logistics/equipment support to improve market access. Selected proof-of-
                              concept business plans that demonstrate viable private sector participation models may receive support to pilot
                              implementation, subject to feasibility, stakeholder buy-in, and scalability potential.
                          32. Support for destination development will include institutional capacity to operationalize tourism circuits at the
                              provincial and local level, with considerations for carrying capacity, climate adaptation, and disaster-risk mitigation.
                              Areas of support will also include developing niche tourism products—such as community-based tourism, gastronomy,
                              agribusiness, handicrafts etc. Strategies will be prepared through a participatory process involving communities and
                              private sector stakeholders and will result in time-bound, prioritized investment programs with identification of
                              financing, marketing, and branding plans.
                          33. This sub-component will also provide business development support for MSMEs and local entrepreneurs, with a
                              particular focus on women-led enterprises. Areas of support will include: (i) strengthening business skills through
                              structured training and mentorship—delivered through incubators and facilitated, where relevant, through IFC’s
                              Entrepreneurship Fund; (ii) fostering product development and innovation by linking market demand with local
                              craftsmanship and delivering market-informed capacity building; (iii) supporting businesses to expand into new
                              markets and diversify products; and (iv) establishing a public–private dialogue platform to facilitate regular
                              engagement between government and local businesses, and developing replicable models for private sector
                              participation. Dedicated skills-development programs will be provided for women entrepreneurs.




_For Official Use Only_
                          34. Component 3: Project management (US$5 million) will be implemented by MoTHUD and provide institutional and
                              technical support to the Project Management Unit (PMU) and two provincial Project Implementation Units (PIUs) for
                              day-to-day administration, monitoring and coordination of project activities, ensuring effective project management,
                              fiduciary oversight (financial management, procurement and audits), E&S compliance, results monitoring and progress
                              reporting. The component will finance Project staff salaries, hiring consultants, and operating costs for the PMU and
                              PIUs. It will also support the capacity building of the project implementing agencies, through training on fiduciary,
                              safeguards, and project management aspects. In addition, it will fund beneficiary perception surveys and impact
                              evaluations (baseline, midline, and endline) to establish a baseline and track the Project’s impact. Furthermore, the
                              component will allocate resources for preparatory activities to scale the project to additional regions or for follow-on
                              engagements, as needed.
                          35. Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million). This zero-cost component (no initial funding
                              allocation) enables rapid reallocation of funds from balances of other project components for emergency response
                              and recovery in case of catastrophic events.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          36. The environmental risk classification is ‘substantial’. Both technical assistance and civil works are expected to result
                              in impacts that are medium in magnitude and spatial consent with a low probability of serious adverse effects to the

                                                                                                                                                  Page 9



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                             The World Bank
                             Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                          environment but with some cumulative and indirect impacts. Preliminary environmental and social (E&S) screening
                          has been completed for the physical investments financed under Component 2. Screening identified that works may
                          result in the generation of dust, noise, erosion and sedimentation, waste generation, and impacts to water quality
                          and marine biodiversity, as well as occupational and community health and safety impacts. No works are planned to
                          be completed in protected areas but some works, if not managed in accordance with the Bank’s Environment, Health
                          and Safety Guidelines and good international industry practices, could impact the critical habitat areas within the
                          Jaffna and Trincomalee lagoons. An environmental and social management framework has been developed, consulted
                          and disclosed during project preparation, including an E&S screening procedure. Final E&S assessments will be
                          confirmed during early Project implementation on confirmation of the activities that will be financed under each
                          Implementing Agency. Mitigation measures will be confirmed through the development and implementation of
                          environmental and social impact assessments (ESIAs), environmental and social management plans (ESMPs), and may
                          be supported by additional studies and management plans to address specific risks and impacts such as biodiversity
                          and changing coastal processes. Technical assistance will likely have similar downstream and indirect impacts to those
                          listed above. RDP implementation can result in cumulative impacts (e.g., land clearance, waste generation, multiple
                          water discharges etc.) and connectivity investments in similar indirect impacts, which will be addressed through the
                          completion of landscape level E&S assessments and E&S screening and assessments respectively. Operational risks
                          and impacts may include the consumption of water and energy, waste generation, and ongoing discharges. These risks




_For Official Use Only_
                          and impacts will be managed through the development and implementation of operational ESMPs. The project’s social
                          risk classification is substantial, reflecting the scale and context of works in dense urban location and the potential for
                          short-term but manageable impacts including those supported under the technical assistance component. While
                          major land acquisition or resettlement is not anticipated since activities will occur on government-owned land,
                          localized livelihood disruptions may arise during civil works. Key social risks include: (a) potential temporary or
                          permanent displacement of informal vendors due to stall removal or market reconfiguration, which may interrupt
                          daily trade and income; (b) temporary livelihood impacts from restricted access to fishing landing sites and jetty
                          operations in two clusters, affecting fish landings and market access; (c) temporary disruptions to access and mobility
                          for households, businesses, and public institutions, including homes, shops, bus stands, schools, and religious centers;
                          (d) occupational and community health and safety risks from civil works in congested areas, such as exposure to dust
                          and noise, open excavations, heavy machinery movement, and inadequate traffic management; (e) SEA/SH risks linked
                          to labor influx near settlements, particularly where workers are housed within communities; (f) cultural heritage risks
                          affecting archaeologically and religiously significant sites; (g) disproportionate impacts on poor and vulnerable groups
                          if beneficiary selection or access criteria are inequitably applied; and (h) social tensions from inadequate consultations
                          or perceived unfairness in allocation of upgraded spaces and services. These risks will be mitigated through inclusive
                          design to minimize displacement, livelihood assistance for affected groups, phased construction with provision of
                          alternative sites, robust health and safety measures including traffic management, SEA/SH prevention and response
                          actions, and cultural heritage protection measures. All interventions will follow comprehensive stakeholder
                          engagement and conflict-sensitive principles to ensure diverse views are considered and vulnerable groups are not
                          disproportionately impacted. Environmental and Social measures will be embedded in instruments: ESMF,
                          Resettlement Planning Framework (RPF), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), Labor Management Procedures (LMP),
                          and a SEA/SH Action Plan. Landscape-level assessments will guide regional development planning and technical
                          assistance will comply with the Bank’s Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs). The SEA/SH risk of the project is
                          ‘Substantial” and determined through the application of the World Bank’s SEA/SH Risk Rating tools for Major Civil
                          Works and the Social, Protection and Jobs. This rating is based on the prevailing levels of sexual violence and the
                          vulnerabilities of women headed households in the project areas, potential for labor influx, and the interaction

                                                                                                                                               Page 10



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                              between project actors and local communities, particularly in regions with existing vulnerabilities. To mitigate these
                              risks, the project will integrate appropriate SEA/SH prevention and response measures into its environmental and
                              social instruments. A GBV/SEA Action Plan is developed to address these risks specifically and tailored mitigation and
                              response measures, which will be included as a commitment in the ESCP.

                           E. Implementation
                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          37. The Ministry of Transport Highway and Urban Development (MoTHUD) and two Provincial Councils (PCs) will serve
                              as the Project Implementing Agencies, responsible for overseeing the overall execution of the Project.
                              Implementation will be coordinated through a Project Management Unit (PMU) housed at MoTHUD. The PMU will be
                              staffed with key personnel including: a Ministerial Focal Point, Technical Staff from the Urban Development Authority
                              (UDA), Project Director, Deputy Project Director, Financial Management Specialist and Accountant, Procurement
                              Specialist and Procurement Officer, Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) Officer, Technical Experts (as required), Senior
                              Environmental Specialist, Senior Social Development Specialist and Gender/GBV specialist. The PMU’s core
                              responsibilities will include day-to-day implementation of activities—such as field supervision and quality assurance,
                              procurement, contract management, fund disbursement and financial reporting—engagement with the private sector
                              to facilitate PPPs, maintaining compliance with environmental and social framework, coordinating with Provincial PIUs




_For Official Use Only_
                              for project activities and progress reporting. Implementation arrangements are under discussion with the
                              Government, pending formal confirmation from the Ministry of Finance, GoSL.
                          38. Two Provincial PIUs will be established under the Chief Secretary in both the Northern and Eastern Provinces to
                              support effective project execution at the provincial level. The operational aspects coordination between the PMU
                              and the PIUs will be formalized through Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs) between MTHUD and the respective
                              Chief Secretaries. Each PIU will be staffed with: a Deputy Project Director, Accountant, Procurement Officer,
                              Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) Officer, Technical Experts (as needed), environmental specialist, social specialist and
                              health and safety specialist. PIUs will play a key role in coordinating with provincial and local government entities to
                              ensure timely and efficient implementation of project-specific activities. The responsibilities of the PIUs will include
                              implementing project activities in Component 2 and 3, including procurement, environmental and social clearances,
                              contract management, and monthly reporting to the PMU and PCC on progress, challenges, and achievements,
                              coordinating with the private sector to facilitate PPPs.
                          39. Project Partner Agencies (PPAs) will assist the PMU in implementation of various activities agreed under project
                              components. The PPAs may include: Roads Development Authorities and Civil Aviation Department; National Water
                              Supply and Drainage Board; Fisheries departments; Coastal Conservation Department; Archeological Department;
                              relevant local authorities, among others. Other agencies can be identified as PPAs, when relevant support is required.
                              The key responsibilities of PPAs include, in collaboration with the PMU, PIUs, and design and supervision consultants:
                              (i) support the preparation of investments in prioritized clusters, including the development of implementation plans,
                              review of technical designs, and facilitation of required clearances, etc.; (ii) supervise the implementation of
                              investments and report to the PMU/PIUs on progress and quality; (iii) conduct and/or supervise required assessments
                              and studies; (iv) assist the PMU in ensuring compliance with the project’s environmental and social safeguards; and
                              (v) commit to the future operation and maintenance of the delivered infrastructure.
                          40. To ensure effective coordination and guidance on strategic directions, the Project will be overseen by a National
                              Steering Committee (NSC) and Provincial Coordinating Committees (PCC). The NSC will comprise the Governors and
                              Chief Secretaries of the two recipient Provinces, Secretaries from the MoTHUD and the Ministry of Provincial Councils
                              and Local Governments (MPCLG), representatives from other relevant Ministries, and Director Generals of the

                                                                                                                                                 Page 11



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                              National Planning Department (NPD) and the External Resources Department (ERD). The NSC will be responsible for:
                              reviewing overall project implementation progress, addressing policy-level challenges, providing guidance for
                              strategic decisions, ensuring coordination and alignment between national and provincial stakeholders, and
                              facilitating timely allocation of project funds. The NSC will convene quarterly and will be co-chaired by the Secretaries
                              of MoTHUD and MPCLG. The Provincial Coordinating Committee (PCC) will be established in each province to ensure
                              effective technical coordination among governmental entities for the timely implementation of project activities at
                              the provincial level. The PCC will include provincial representatives from central agencies, relevant Government
                              Agents (GAs), Divisional Secretaries, and Local Authority Secretaries. The PCC will be chaired by the respective
                              Governors and convened quarterly.
                          41. The specific roles and responsibilities of all entities mentioned above will be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
                              (POM), which will be developed by the PMU, in collaboration with two PIUs, and submitted to the Bank for no-
                              objection.
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Phoram Shah




_For Official Use Only_
                             Senior Urban Specialist

                             Gayatri Singh
                             Lead Urban Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

                           Implementing Agencies
                            Ministry of Transport, Highways and Urban Development

                           FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                           The World Bank
                           1818 H Street, NW
                           Washington, D.C. 20433
                           Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                           Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                           APPROVAL


                           Task Team Leader(s):                        Phoram Shah, Gayatri Singh



                                                                                                                                                  Page 12



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:              Abedalrazq F. Khalil                   03-Dec-2025

                          Country Director:                      Gevorg Sargsyan                        18-Dec-2025




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                                  Page 13



                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
