Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)




                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                      Project Information Document (PID)


            _For Official Use Only_
                                                     Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01518




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                         Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                                                                                     STRENGTHENING OF THE
                                                         LATIN AMERICA AND                                           PRIORITY TOURISM
                          Peru                                                          P511489
                                                         CARIBBEAN                                                   DESTINATION AREQUIPA-
                                                                                                                     COLCA IN PERU
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project                                                                         Finance, Competitiveness
                                                         06-Oct-2025                    09-Dec-2025
                          Financing (IPF)                                                                            and Innovation
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          Ministry of Economy and        Regional Government of
                          Finance                        Arequipa




_For Official Use Only_
                          Proposed Development Objective(s)

                          The PDO is to improve the quality of tourism infrastructure and services, enhance the conditions of natural and
                          cultural heritage sites, and increase sustainable tourism activity in the Arequipa region of Peru.


                          Components
                          1. Improving the quality of selected tourism attractions
                          2. Upgrading roads and investing in water, sanitation and health facilities
                          3. Institutional strengthening
                          4. Project implementation

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                            94.80

                            Total Financing                                                                                                 94.80


                                                                                                                                              Page 1



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)


                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                        75.80
                             Financing Gap                                                                                                         0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                      75.80
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                               Counterpart Funding                                                                                               19.00
                                 Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                                                       19.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification




_For Official Use Only_
                          Substantial


                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                          B. Introduction and Context

                          Country Context
                          1.      Peru achieved remarkable growth in the 2000s by pursuing a substantial reform program that leveraged its
                          economic potential and natural endowments. Peru is the second largest copper exporter after Chile, the third largest
                          fish producer, and a major exporter of fruit and vegetables. It holds significant reserves of critical minerals for the global
                          energy transition, as well as gold, silver, zinc, lead, and iron. It is one of the world’s top 10 biodiverse countries. Between
                          2002 and 2013, Peru grew at 6.1%, almost double the regional average. Following key reforms to promote transparency
                          and accountability of the macro-fiscal framework in the 1990s, Peru enjoyed an extended period of macro and political
                          stability in the 2000s.

                          2.      However, progress has stalled during the last decade. Growth slowed to an average of 3% post-2014. Total
                          investment has stagnated, and since 2014, 90% of Peru’s growth has come solely from consumption. The poverty rate
                          has been stagnant since 2014, and labor market improvements have been limited, with an increase of informality. The
                          slowdown has revealed important structural challenges: low productivity and persistent spatial disparities. In recent
                          years, declining institutions and increased political instability have emerged as a third structural challenge. And yet, Peru
                          remains a country with vast potential, and with a track record of leveraging its comparative advantage: non-traditional
                          agricultural and mining exports grew 15 and 9 times in value, respectively, between 2000 and 2022. It still has untapped
                          potential in other sectors such as tourism. Peru's globally recognized Inca heritage and vibrant food scene have


                                                                                                                                                    Page 2



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)


                          established the country as a premier destination in South America. However, there remain numerous unexplored natural
                          and cultural treasures, and tourism currently represents only 7% of total exports.

                          3.     Regional (subnational) economic convergence can be part of the solution to inclusive growth. Peru remains one
                          of the most unequal countries in Latin America in terms of the income gap between the richest and the poorest regions.
                          Climate change will likely exacerbate existing regional disparities by increasing the impacts and frequency of natural
                          hazards, which lagging regions have limited resources to prevent and mitigate. Identifying and unlocking comparative
                          advantages in lagging regions holds the potential for the private sector to create quality jobs.

                          4.     Peru’s public investment management institutions are a constraint to unlocking regional development
                          potential. At 4.5% of GDP, public investment is high in Peru, both compared to OECD countries and to regional peers,
                          such as Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico. Subnational governments account for 63% of the initial annual budget
                          allocated to public investment. However, the returns from these investments for service delivery and regional growth fall
                          short of their potential due to weaknesses in public investment management and coordination. Investment decisions are
                          highly fragmented across sectors and levels of government, undermining Peru’s ability to strategically address cross-
                          cutting regional development challenges.

                          Sectoral and Institutional Context




_For Official Use Only_
                          5.      Peru is celebrated for its rich cultural heritage and diverse ecosystems, ranking as one of the 17 mega-diverse
                          countries globally. It hosts over 70 significant archaeological sites, including Machu Picchu, and is renowned for its avian
                          diversity and culinary excellence. Tourism, a vital economic sector, contributed 9.3% to Peru's GDP in 2019, generating
                          nearly 1.3 million jobs from 4.5 million international arrivals and 50 million domestic visits. However, the pandemic
                          severely impacted tourism, with recovery to pre-pandemic levels expected by 2025.

                          6.     Despite its assets, Peru attracts fewer tourists compared to similar countries, with tourism concentrated in Lima,
                          Cusco, and Machu Picchu. Expanding tourism beyond these areas can reduce regional disparities and create more jobs,
                          particularly in adventure and nature-based tourism, which are job-intensive and support local economies. The
                          government has developed strategies to boost tourism, but investment remains low, with only 0.8% of the budget
                          allocated to tourism from 2005-2023.

                          7.      Efficient tourism development in Peru faces challenges due to fragmented institutional landscapes and complex
                          public investment systems. The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism (MINCETUR) handles national strategic planning,
                          while regional and municipal governments manage local infrastructure but lack resources. There is no strategic national
                          investment plan for cross-sectoral objectives like regional economic development through tourism.

                          8.     The Arequipa region, with its cultural sights and natural endowments, has high potential for tourism growth.
                          The government selected Arequipa-Colca as a priority destination, supported by analytical work from the World Bank
                          Group (WBG). Adventure tourism (which includes nature and cultural tourism), attracting high-value customers and
                          supporting local economies, holds promise for Arequipa. Inadequate infrastructure, limited accessibility, and insufficient
                          investment hinder tourism potential. Addressing these challenges through strategic investments can enhance visitor
                          experiences and distribute economic benefits more evenly.




                                                                                                                                                  Page 3



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)


                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)

                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the quality of tourism infrastructure and services, enhance
                           the conditions of natural and cultural heritage sites, and increase sustainable tourism activity in the Arequipa region
                           of Peru.

                            Key Results
                          PDO will be monitored through 3 main indicators:
                             • Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services.
                             • Arrivals at lodging establishments in the Arequipa-Colca Tourist Corridor.
                             • Length of stay of domestic and foreign tourists in the Arequipa-Colca Tourist Corridor.

                            D. Project Description

                          9.     The project aims to unlock tourism development in the Arequipa region through coordinated multisectoral
                          investments. Designed to integrate infrastructure upgrades, cultural heritage preservation, and effective destination




_For Official Use Only_
                          management, the project targets key tourism routes and sites between the city of Arequipa and the Colca Valley,
                          including natural reserves, historic churches and towns, and adventure attractions that currently suffer from poor
                          maintenance and accessibility. By engaging central and local government agencies, private sector partners, and local
                          communities, the initiative seeks to establish a sustainable, resilient, and inclusive tourism ecosystem that not only
                          enriches the visitor experience—by enabling longer stays and higher economic benefits—but also stimulates private
                          investment through innovative financing mechanisms such as Obras por Impuestos. Complementary support activities
                          focus on capacity building, promotion, and institutional reforms to overcome existing public investment challenges in
                          Peru, with the potential for scaling up the approach to other priority destinations, paving the way for a blueprint for
                          regional development investment programs.

                          10.     The project comprises 33 investments across sectors such as tourism, culture, transport, water/sanitation,
                          health, and environment, along with institutional strengthening and project management components. The total
                          project cost is estimated at US$92.3 million, with the World Bank financing 80% (US$73.9 million) and the remainder
                          from counterpart funds. Component 1 focuses on enhancing tourist attractions and services in Arequipa, with a budget
                          of US$46.9 million. It includes developing and improving services at targeted sites and attractions, and rehabilitating
                          cultural sites like historic churches in the Colca Valley. Component 2, with a budget of US$35.3 million, aims to upgrade
                          roads, enhance streets, and invest in water, sanitation, and health facilities to improve connectivity and public
                          infrastructure along main tourism routes. Component 3, allocated US$4.3 million, is dedicated to institutional
                          strengthening, supporting studies, tools, and capacity development to manage and promote the destination, thereby
                          increasing visitor numbers, length of stay, and daily expenditures. It includes destination marketing and promotion,
                          capacity building for destination management, and developing a tourism information system. Component 4, also
                          budgeted at US$4.3 million, covers project implementation, including technical, fiduciary, environmental, social, and
                          administrative functions.




                                                                                                                                                 Page 4



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          11.     The project’s Environmental and Social Risk Classification is Substantial. This classification reflects the scope and
                          nature of the planned interventions, the location of works in environmentally and culturally sensitive areas, and the
                          limited institutional capacity of the Regional Government of Arequipa to manage risks in line with the Environmental and
                          Social Framework (ESF). The operation will finance 33 investments across six sectors—tourism, culture, transport, water
                          supply and sanitation, health, and environment—targeting both urban and rural areas along the Arequipa-Colca tourism
                          corridor. Key areas of intervention include the Colca Valley, the Salinas and Aguada Blanca National Reserve, and colonial
                          and pre-Hispanic heritage sites. Project activities aim to improve tourism infrastructure and basic services while
                          promoting inclusive and sustainable economic growth. Environmental risks and impacts are expected to stem from small-




_For Official Use Only_
                          and medium-scale civil works such as road improvements, water and sanitation infrastructure, and the development of
                          visitor facilities. Possible risks and impacts include: (i) noise, vibration, dust, and traffic disturbances; (ii) inadequate
                          management of construction waste, including hazardous waste; (iii) contamination of water bodies due to runoff or poor
                          drainage; (iv) health and safety risks to workers and nearby communities; (v) disturbance to biodiversity in protected or
                          ecologically sensitive areas; (vi) cumulative impacts from increased tourism activity in fragile ecosystems; and (vii)
                          improper or outdated restoration techniques for tangible cultural heritage. Although interventions are expected to occur
                          mainly on previously disturbed sites, some activities may require vegetation clearing or occur within natural protected
                          areas. These impacts are expected to be site-specific, predictable, and manageable with known mitigation measures.
                          Social risks are linked to the possible exclusion of indigenous peoples (Quechua-speaking peasant communities) and other
                          vulnerable groups from sharing in project benefits; high levels of informality in the areas to be intervened; the possibility
                          of physical and/or economic displacement from the project’s infrastructure components; and social tensions related to
                          skewed tourism revenue distribution. The Regional Government of requipa lacks established capacity to manage social
                          risks in line with the ESF, and stakeholder engagement, labor management, and grievances management in line with
                          international good practice standards are currently underdeveloped. The project will utilize a staggered approach to ESF
                          documents preparation and disclosure, starting with E&S Risk and Impact Matrices, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan, and
                          an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan prior to appraisal; Labor Management Plan and an Indigenous People
                          Policy Framework prior to effectiveness; and site-specific plans as part of each investment bidding process during
                          implementation.

                          E. Implementation
                          Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                          MINCETUR is the lead formulation agency of the project, and implementation will be the responsibility of the Regional
                          Government of Arequipa. A Project Implementation Unit will be established in the Regional Government, suitable to
                          manage the complexity of a multi-sector project, with direct reporting to the governor, higher autonomy and flexibility



                                                                                                                                                   Page 5



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)


                          in the hiring of qualified staff, and continuity in team composition and leadership. The regional directorate of tourism is
                          also expected to play a substantial technical role.


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                          CONTACT POINT

                          World Bank
                            Hind Kadiri
                            Senior Private Sector Specialist

                            Thomas Edward Haven
                            Senior Private Sector Specialist

                            Cecilia Nallely Escalante Hernandez
                            Transport Specialist




_For Official Use Only_
                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Ministry of Economy and Finance

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Regional Government of Arequipa

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                       Hind Kadiri, Thomas Edward Haven, Cecilia Nallely Escalante Hernandez

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:                  Stefka Slavova                            17-Sep-2025

                          Country Director:                          Oliver Braedt                             28-Oct-2025


                                                                                                                                                 Page 6



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                          The World Bank
                          STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                       Page 7



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
