Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                          Report No: PADHP00194


                                                               INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                      ON A

                                                                              PROPOSED CREDIT

                                                IN THE AMOUNT OF US$ 460 MILLION, OF WHICH, US$ 31 MILLION FROM
                                                       THE SCALE UP WINDOW (SHORTER MATURITY LOAN (SML)

                                                                          AND A PROPOSED GRANT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                              IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 58 MILLION
                                           (US$80 MILLION EQUIVALENT FROM THE HOST COMMUNITY-REFUGEE WINDOW)

                                                                                    TO THE

                                                                            REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

                                                                                     FOR A




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               UGANDA CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT (UCMID) OPERATION (P511300)
                                                                                 March 10, 2026

                                Urban, Resilience and Land Global Practice
                                Eastern and Southern Africa Region




                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                         CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

               (Exchange Rate Effective {December 31, 2025})

                               Currency Unit = US$

                            0.72365707 SDR = US$1

                                1.38187 US$ = SDR 1

                                FISCAL YEAR
                              July 1 - June 30




  Regional Vice President: Ndiame Diop
Regional Practice Director: Erik Magnus Fernstrom
        Division Director: Qimiao Fan
        Practice Manager: Abhas Kumar Jha
      Task Team Leaders: John Stephen Ajalu, Phan Thi Phuong Huyen




                                                         Official Use Only
           ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

APA        Annual Performance Assessment
BRT        Bus Rapid Transit
CDF        City Development Forum
CERC       Contingent Emergency Response Component
CIP        Capital Investment Plan
CAO        Chief Administrative Officer
CPF        Country Partnership Framework
DLI        Disbursement Linked Indicator
DLR        Disbursement Linked Results
DRDIP      Development Response to Displacement Impact Project
ESHS       Environmental, Social, Health and Safety
ESIA       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESSA       Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
FSA        Fiduciary System Assessment
GBV        Gender-based Violence
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
GEMS       Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision
GHG        Green House Gas
GIS        Geographic Information Systems
GKMA       Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area
GKMA-UDP   Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area Urban Development Program
GoU        Government of Uganda
GRM        Grievance Redress Mechanism
IFMIS      Integrated Financial Management Information System
IPF        Investment Project Financing
IRAS       Integrated Revenue Administration System
ISG        Institutional Strengthening Grants
IVA        Independent Verification Agent
LED        Local Economic Development
LG         Local Government
LGFC       Local Government Finance Commission
LGMSD      Local Government Management of Service Delivery
LRT        Light Rail Transit
MDAs       Ministries, Departments and Agencies
MDF        Municipal Development Forum
M&E        Monitoring and Evaluation
MoFPED     Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
MoGLSD     Ministry of Gender, Labor and Social Development
MoKCC&MA   Ministry for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs
MoLG       Ministry of Local Government
MoLHUD     Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
                                                          Official Use Only
MoEMD   Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development
MoJCA   Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
MoTIC   Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
MoWE    Ministry of Water and Environment
MoWT    Ministry of Works and Transport
MTEF    Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
NBS     Nature-Based Solutions
NDC     Nationally Determined Contribution
NDPIV   National Development Plan Phase Four
NEMA    National Environment Management Authority
NMT     Non-Motorized Transport
NPA     National Planning Authority
NWSC    National Water and Sewerage Corporation
O&M     Operations and Maintenance
OAG     Office of the Auditor General
OHS     Occupational Health and Safety
OIM     Operation Implementation Manual
OPM     Office of the Prime Minister
OSR     Own Source Revenue
OTIMS   Online Transfer Information Management System
PAC     Public Accounts Committee
PAD     Program Appraisal Document
PAP     Project Affected Person
PBS     Program Budgeting System
PDO     Program Development Objective
PforR   Program for Results
PIPs    Performance Improvement Plans
PPDA    Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority
PPP     Public Private Partnership
PSC     Program Steering Committee
PS      Permanent Secretary
OST     Operation Support Team
OTC     Operation Technical Committee
RA      Result Area
RAP     Resettlement Action Plan
RHC     Refugee Hosting Community
RHD     Refugee Hosting District
RoW     Right of Way
SESA    Strategic Environmental Management Assessment
SLAAC   Systematic Land Adjudication and Certification
SUH     Sustainable Urbanization and Housing
SWM     Solid Waste Management
TA      Technical Assessment

                                                           Official Use Only
ToC     Theory of Change
UBOS    Uganda Bureau of Statistics
UCMID   Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development
UDG     Urban Development Grant
UGIFT   Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Program
UNHCR   United Nations High Commission for Refugees
USMID   Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development
VfM     Value for Money
WHR     Window for Host-communities and Refugees




                                                          Official Use Only
The World Bank
Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                                                    PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
Operation (P511300)



                                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS

 DATASHEET ......................................................................................................................................... 6
 I.     STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................................10
       A.     Program Strategic Context .......................................................................................................... 10
       B. Sectoral (or Multi-Sectoral) and Institutional Context ................................................................... 12
 II.    PROGRAM DESCRIPTION.............................................................................................................15
       A. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO)..................................................................................... 16
       B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators ............................................................................................ 16
       C. PforR Program Scope [Including IPF project].................................................................................. 19
       D. Disbursement Linked Indicators ..................................................................................................... 27
       E. Role of Partners ............................................................................................................................ 28
       F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Program Design ................................................................ 29
 III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION ....................................................................................................31
       A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 31
       B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ............................................. 33
       C. Disbursement Arrangements.......................................................................................................... 33
 IV. PROGRAM ASSESSMENTS SUMMARY .........................................................................................34
       A. Technical ......................................................................................................................................... 34
       B. Fiduciary.......................................................................................................................................... 40
       C. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 42
       D. IPF appraisal ................................................................................................................................... 45
 V.    KEY RISKS ................................................................................................................................... 49
 ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK .......................................................................................................52
 ANNEX 2. INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING (IPF) PROJECT ............................................................... 64




                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     Operation (P511300)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project Beneficiary(ies)   Operation Name
Uganda                     Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)
                                                     Does this operation have an IPF     Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID               Financing Instrument
                                                     component?                          Classification (IPF Component)
                           Program-for-Results
P511300                                              Yes                                 Substantial
                           Financing (PforR)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities

[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                     [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)             [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Small State(s)                                             [ ] Conflict
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                 [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
25-Mar-2026                            30-Jun-2032
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No


Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to enhance the institutional performance of selected urban local governments and ministries for urban
planning and management and improve access to climate smart infrastructure, services and jobs for urban residents
and displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate




                                                                                                                          6


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)        PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     Operation (P511300)




Organizations

 Borrower:                       Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

 Implementing Agency:            Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

SUMMARY

  Government program Cost                                                                              186.30

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                 540.00
   Total Program Cost                                                                                  513.00

   IPF Component                                                                                         27.00

  Total Financing                                                                                      540.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                           0.00

Financing (US$, Millions)

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                         540.00

      IDA Credit                                                                                       429.00

      IDA Grant                                                                                          80.00

      IDA Shorter Maturity Loan (SML)                                                                    31.00


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)



                                                                                                              7


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    Operation (P511300)



                                                                                             Guarantee
                          Credit Amount      Grant Amount            SML Amount                            Total Amount
                                                                                               Amount

National
Performance-Based                429.00                  0.00                 0.00                0.00            429.00
Allocations (PBA)

Window for Host
Communities and                     0.00               80.00                  0.00                0.00             80.00
Refugees (WHR)

Scale-Up Window
                                    0.00                 0.00                31.00                0.00             31.00
(SUW)

Total                            429.00                80.00                 31.00                0.00            540.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year              2026           2027           2028                2029             2030         2031          2032

Annual             0.00          119.00         135.50             123.09            98.05        62.86          1.50
Cumulative         0.00          119.00         254.50             377.59         475.64          538.50       540.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                            Contributing Practice Areas
Urban, Resilience and Land                                      Climate Change; Transport; Jobs

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate



                                                                                                                        8


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)             PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     Operation (P511300)


SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                  Substantial
2. Macroeconomic                                                             Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                            Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                    Low
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability              Substantial
6. Fiduciary                                                                 Substantial
7. Environment and Social                                                    Substantial
8. Stakeholders                                                              Substantial
9. Other                                                                     Substantial
10. Overall                                                                  Substantial




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE

Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes    [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No


Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL




                                                                                                                   9


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)          PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)



 Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
                                    E & S Standards                                             Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                  Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                         Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                               Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement    Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                  Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                  Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                          Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                   Not Currently Relevant
 NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
 environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
 Summary (ESRS).

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
 LEGAL
 Legal Covenants
 Sections and Description

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
 Conditions
 Type                             Citation                   Description                     Financing Source




I.   STRATEGIC CONTEXT

A.   Program Strategic Context




                                                                                                                       10


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                         PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
          Operation (P511300)


1.      Uganda is at a critical juncture in its development trajectory. The urban population is growing rapidly (5.2% 1
annually and among the fastest in Africa) and is projected to surpass the rural population by 2060. Uganda’s cities and
towns are increasingly central to economic transformation, already serving as hubs for trade, services, and manufacturing.
More than one third of all new jobs created are in cities and towns. Uganda’s Fourth National Development Plan (NDPIV)
(2025/26–2029/30) sets ambitious targets: achieving higher household incomes, full monetization of the economy, and
creating 2.5 million new jobs. Urbanization is recognized as a critical enabler of these goals, especially for youth and
women.
2.       Despite recent economic growth, Uganda’s development needs remain immense. Inadequate public financing -
driven by low domestic revenue, rising debt service costs, and persistent under-execution of the development budget
(with absorption shortfalls of between 5-12% and budget credibility gaps of between 14-22% 2) - has restricted fiscal space
for infrastructure expansion. However, the challenge is not solely about funding. Technical capacity gaps, fragmented
planning, and weak institutional systems also constrain the effectiveness of investments. Other challenges include
infrastructure gaps as urban roads (19,959 km) constitute only 13% of the network, and of which only 6% is paved, poor
public transport integration, and inadequate solid waste management (only between 30-40% collected, only 4% recycled).
Unplanned urban sprawl and weak planning further threaten productivity, environmental sustainability, and resilience.
Addressing these issues requires not just increased investment, but also robust reforms, strengthened systems, and
enhanced technical capacity to ensure resources translate into sustainable results.
3.      Climate change further compounds these pressures. Uganda ranks 14th globally for disaster risk and 48th for
disaster preparedness, facing frequent floods, mudslides, and extreme weather events. Vulnerable communities,
especially the urban poor, contend with limited job security, poverty, and poor access to basic services. As part of the Paris
Agreement, Uganda aims to reduce emissions by 24.7% by 2030. Uganda has several policies and strategies in place to
address climate challenges, including the 2021 National Climate Change Act 3 which gives force of law to the Paris
Agreement. The Ministry of Water and Environment, Climate Change Department is responsible for coordination,
monitoring, and evaluation, as well as ensuring Uganda’s mitigation and adaptation obligations are met.
4.      Women’s labor force participation is 68%, compared to 72.4% for men, and they are underrepresented in
decision-making roles. Women experience higher rates of vulnerable employment, which means they are less likely to
have social protection and more likely to fall into poverty. Women represent less than 30% of those employed in senior
and middle management positions and only 34% of national parliament 4. Policy reforms have improved gender equality,
but barriers to women's participation and asset ownership remain.
5.       In this context, the World Bank’s engagement is designed to leverage relatively modest grant and credit
resources to catalyze far-reaching reforms and systemic change. Rather than attempting to meet all infrastructure needs
directly, the program focuses on strengthening institutions, incentivizing performance, and crowding in both public and
private investment by linking fiscal transfers to improved planning, procurement, and safeguards. The World Bank (WB)
engagement also promotes private capital mobilization and public-private partnerships (PPPs) in urban services and
infrastructure, while supporting reforms to enhance municipal creditworthiness and create an enabling environment for
private sector participation. These efforts are designed to ensure that Uganda’s cities can attract investment, innovate in
service delivery, and build sustainable financing models for inclusive urban growth.



1
    Ministry of Lands, Housing & Urban Development, Uganda State of Urban Sector Report – 2021-2022
2 MoFPED, Semi-Annual and Annual Budget Performance Reports FY 2019/20–2023/24; UNICEF National Budget Brief FY 2023/24
3 Uganda Updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), September 2022
4 Gender Data Portal, World Bank




                                                                                                                               Page 11


                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                          PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       Operation (P511300)


B. Sectoral (or Multi-Sectoral) and Institutional Context
6.       Uganda’s cities and towns are critical engines of economic growth and jobs. Uganda’s urban areas generate
around 70% 5 of the country’s non-agricultural Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and account for 36% of total job creation.
Urban areas are growing swiftly, almost twice as fast as the national growth rate. The urban population, which currently
stands at 27% according to the 2024 population census, and this is projected to surpass the rural population by year 2060 6,
increasing pressure on urban infrastructure, services, and natural resources. Urban economies hold significant potential
for local economic development and job creation, particularly for youth and women. Uganda is projected to add about 1
million new entrants to the labor force each year from 2025 to 2035, totaling 10 million people 7. With over 75% of the
population under 35 and a median age of 15.9 years, the country faces growing pressure to generate productive
employment 8. Yet, the economy currently creates only a fraction of the jobs needed, with most young people working in
informal or unpaid roles. Urban areas offer the greatest opportunity to absorb this expanding labor force through
diversified economic activities, infrastructure investment, and enterprise growth.
7.       Unplanned urban sprawl and the lack of integrated urban planning have hampered productivity-enhancing
urban development. Uganda’s urban planning faces critical gaps, and yet, only the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area
(GKMA) has a spatial plan. Most urban areas rely on basic physical plans that are neither integrated with spatial nor
economic development strategies, leaving investments unguided. In newly upgraded cities, plans often exclude expanded
boundaries, while many smaller municipalities lack plans altogether. Unplanned urban sprawl has led to higher
infrastructure costs, environmental degradation, pollution, and increased flooding. Weak land ownership systems and
complex administration further hinder development control and infrastructure investments. Sustainable urbanization is
being severely hampered by inadequate institutional capacity within local Governments. This is compounded by an
inadequate level of institutional capacity at the Ministry of Lands, housing and Urban Development, which leaves the
Ministry unable to fulfill its mandate of establishing integrated planning systems or providing the support to Local
Governments desperately need.
8.       Urban infrastructure has failed to keep up with the pressing needs. Urban roads make up only 13% (19,959 km)
of the country’s road network. In addition, the quality of these roads is poor, with less than half being paved (1,188 km) 9.
Public transport lacks integration, primarily catering to motorized vehicles with limited options for pedestrians and
alternative transit modes. Urban flooding has worsened due to poor drainage systems and solid waste management
(SWM) in urban areas. Generally, only 30-40% of urban solid waste is collected, and only 4% is currently being reused and
recycled. Poor waste collection practices exacerbate urban flooding risks, as drainage systems become clogged and
encroached wetlands lose their flood-buffering capacities. The combined impact of planning weaknesses and inadequate
infrastructure has had impact on refugee integration in urban areas.
9.       Institutional weaknesses, especially at the local level, constrain effective urban management. Limited technical
and financial capacity 10 restrict their ability to implement effective planning, deliver essential services, and enforce
regulations. These gaps mean that even when resources are available, their impact is diminished—critical infrastructure
suffers, as seen in the accelerated deterioration of roads due to poor maintenance and rehabilitation, which further

5 Ministry of Lands, Housing & Urban Development, Uganda State of Urban Sector Report – 2021-2022
6 The demographic boom: An explainer on Uganda’s population trends, World Bank – February 2021
7 https://eprcug.org/eprc-in-the-news/where-should-the-ndp-iv-focus-to-create-more-jobs/
8https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/uganda/publication/uganda-jobs-strategy-creating-more-jobs-for-ugandas-youth-and-economic-

transformation
9Urban Sector Report – 2024, MoLHUD
10Acomprehensive baseline data set from 47 LGs showed deficiencies in planning frameworks, revenue collection, procurement, financial
management, project execution, E&S safeguards, and staffing.


                                                                                                                                   Page 12


                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                           PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       Operation (P511300)


compounds future costs. Addressing these challenges requires more than additional funding; it demands targeted
capacity-building, institutional reforms, and the establishment of sustainable systems to ensure that investments translate
into lasting improvements and support Uganda’s urban growth and economic transformation objectives.
10.      Refugee-hosting districts (RHDs) are increasingly experiencing pressures. As of November 30, 2025, Uganda
hosts 1,967,186 11 , of which 150,254 refugees and asylum seekers have been registered in Uganda between January and
November 2025. Of the total refugee population, 159,000 are registered in urban centers and cities 12. Of these, 26% have
relocated from settlements, further increasing pressure on urban services. The impacts of displacement extend beyond
the refugees’ settlements themselves, increasingly affecting nearby urban areas. In Uganda 13, most of refugee’s
settlements are located within 10 -20 km of the nearest town, often medium-sized municipalities with limited institutional
and financial capacity. As a result, local health 14 and education facilities 15, as well as other public services, face mounting
pressure to serve both refugees and host communities. This has also led to acute challenges in delivering adequate urban
infrastructure and services—such as health, education, housing, water and sanitation, solid waste management, and
mobility systems—amid overstretched municipal financing. The program will under DLIs 1 and 7 support capacity
enhancement for the refugee-host districts to plan and deliver climate-smart and local economic infrastructure for urban
areas that address the needs and generate economic opportunities for both refugees and host communities.
11.     Uganda’s protection framework for refugees remains broadly adequate. The World Bank, following consultation
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), confirms that the protection framework
for refugees continues to be adequate in Uganda. However, it is currently facing significant challenges due to the rapid
withdrawal of NGOs and the downsizing of institutional presence following unprecedented cuts to UNHCR’s operational
budget. These developments have severely affected the delivery of protection services, education, health, and livelihood
support, resulting in higher rates of school dropouts, deteriorating health outcomes, and deepening economic hardship
among adults. Rising food insecurity has further heightened the risk of gender-based violence (GBV) affecting forcibly
displaced women and girls. These challenges underscore the urgency of transitioning from a predominantly humanitarian
response to a development-oriented approach that strengthens systems and promotes sustainable solutions. Priority
actions include: (i) Strengthening national asylum system by ensuring unhindered access to registration for all asylum-
seekers, fair and efficient asylum procedures and institutional capacity; (ii) Advancing incremental inclusion of refugees
into the National Identification and Registration Authority’s (NIRA) foundational identification system to enable issuance
of trusted ID credentials on par with other residents and foster sustainable access to national services; (iii) Supporting
comprehensive inclusion of refugees into national social protection systems managed by relevant national and sub-
national institutions; (iv) Removing obstacles to refugees’ right to work and securing more sustainable access to land for
subsistence; (v) Advancing the finalization of comprehensive refugee policy enhancing protection-sensitive inclusion and
supporting durable solutions as a cohesive foundation for a sustainable refugee response. The World Bank, following
consultation with UNHCR, confirms that the protection framework for refugees continues to be adequate in Uganda. 16
12.      Strengthening Urban Resilience and Inclusion. Drawing on lessons from the Uganda Support to Municipal
Infrastructure Development Additional Financing (USMID AF), the proposed operation will place stronger emphasis on
urban resilience and inclusion by: (i) mitigating the urban impacts of refugee inflows while fostering inclusive local
economic development for both refugees and host communities; (ii) supporting sustainable solutions to protracted

111,932,134 registered refugees and 35,052 asylum-seekers
12Official number of urban refugees recognized by UNHCR and OPM are in the capital Kampala.
13UNHCR Refugee Protection Assessment of the Republic of Uganda Update No.10, January 1- June 30, 2025.
14Source: Uganda's Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) / proGres
15 World Bank, 2021. Cities, Migration and Forced Displacement: An Agenda for Cities and Towns, Report ACS32024. Authors calculations using

UNHCR UBOS data.
16
 World Bank IDA Window for Host Communities and Refugees (IDA WHR); Update No. 10, 1 January to 30 June 2025, Date: 11 August 2025.


                                                                                                                                       Page 13


                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


displacement by promoting the socio-economic integration of refugees in urban environments; (iii) improving livelihoods
and expanding access to social services, markets, goods, and job opportunities for refugees and refugee hosting
community (RHC); (iv) strengthening preparedness and adaptive capacity to manage future refugee flows while preventing
uncontrolled urban expansion and guiding growth toward sustainable, planned development; and (v) reinforcing social
cohesion and peaceful co-existence through inclusive urban planning, service delivery, and community-level investments.
13.      New Refugee Policy to Strengthen Urban Inclusion. Uganda has made significant strides in its refugee response;
for example, through the Development Response to Displacement Impact Project (DRDIP) community-driven approach,
3,035,432 refugees and host community members now have improved access to social and economic services and
infrastructure. Transport links in refugee-hosting districts have been upgraded to enhance market access and spur growth,
with more than 1,300 km of roads improved under USMID and DRDIP. The Roads and Bridges Project is strengthening the
Koboko–Moyo arterial road to connect the West Nile region with the rest of the country and the neighboring DRC and
South Sudan, while the Energy Access Scale up Project is connecting the refugee hosting areas to the national grid.

14.      A new refugee policy, finalized and expected to be approved in 2026, will provide the foundation for activities
under the Program. The proposed Policy—which emerged from continuous dialogue between development partners and
the Government on the status of urban refugees—places emphasis on clarifying the status and addressing the needs of
urban refugees, including allowing access to services and jobs in cities and towns. It will reinforce the freedom of
movement to urban centers and define strategic interventions to address unclear institutional mandates at the municipal
level, barriers to formal employment, limited housing security, and weak engagement of urban authorities in refugee
management. This policy builds on actions already undertaken by Government to advance longer-term solutions for
refugees and host communities, including embedding the 2023 Global Refugee Forum pledges in Comprehensive Refugee
Response Framework implementation and adopting transition plans to integrate key services into national systems (see
Annex 6, Strategy Note on Support to Refugees and Host Communities, Section 3).

15.      The proposed Government interventions under the new policy include: (i) Developing and operationalizing an
Urban Refugee Strategy with cities and municipalities, defining mandates, financing mechanisms, and coordination
arrangements between OPM, UNHCR, and local governments; (ii) Establishing and operationalizing clear procedures for
registration and recognition of urban refugees, including eligibility criteria based on self-reliance capacity, documentation
requirements, and defined roles of OPM, UNHCR, and municipal authorities in authorizing residence in urban areas; (iii)
Integrating urban refugee data into the national refugee register and municipal planning systems; (iv) Enhancing municipal
systems to expand refugees’ access to services and protection, with targeted measures for vulnerable households and
improved GBV prevention, legal aid, and community policing mechanisms; (v) Addressing housing and tenure insecurity
in urban areas through partnerships with municipalities, the private sector, and development partners to expand
affordable housing and secure rental arrangements; (vi) Facilitating self-reliance and formal employment opportunities
by promoting recognition of refugee documentation, supporting registration of refugee-owned enterprises, and
expanding access to vocational training, apprenticeships, and microfinance; (vii) Strengthening municipal-level capacity
through budget allocations, technical support, and integration of refugee priorities into city and municipal development
plans.

16.     Uganda will require concerted urban reforms to navigate this pivotal moment in its urban transition. With urban
population projected to more than double in the next two decades, the challenge is to ensure that rapid expansion
translates into productive jobs for a youthful labor force rather than fragmented sprawl and informality. The Government
of Uganda (GoU) has already taken important strategic and institutional steps. Notably, the Sustainable Urbanization and
Housing (SUH) program targets “higher household incomes and employment for sustainable socio-economic
transformation” and covers the following five strategic objectives: urban infrastructure, physical planning, drainage and

                                                                                                                     Page 14


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)           PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       Operation (P511300)


waste management, economic opportunities, affordable housing, and policy, legal and institutional strengthening. The
GoU established 10 new cities in 2020 and plans to upgrade 5 additional municipalities into cities. The government also
prioritizes metropolitan management for Greater Kampala and growth along strategic economic corridors. The new
refugee policy will support strengthening institutional capacity of city, municipal and national institutions for urban
management and engage urban authorities on refugee management through the operationalization of the physical
development plans with support of the new national refugee policy and the subsequent urban refugee strategy that will
be prepared. The next step in the urban reform is to equip and support cities and municipalities to meet these strategic
and institutional goals – including addressing challenges of refugee integration in urban areas – and to consolidate these
initiatives into a coherent programmatic framework that positions cities as engines of inclusive growth, resilience, and
innovation. Supporting sustainable waste management in urban areas will also be critical in the next five years.
17.      The reform path builds on hard-won lessons from earlier Bank-financed and government-led programs. The
Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID, P117876) demonstrated the value of performance-
based grants to strengthen local systems, expand infrastructure, and crowd in own source revenue increase. The Greater
Kampala Metropolitan Area Urban Development Program (GKMA-UDP, P115660) has introduced metropolitan
coordination, E&S enforcement, and cross-jurisdiction planning. The Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Program
(UGIFT, P160250) highlighted the result-based transfers to incentivize social service delivery, while Uganda Strengthening
Public Investment and Asset Management for Growth and Resilience Operation (PIM PLUS, P511206) underscores the
importance of sound project preparation, appraisal, and portfolio management for long-term efficiency. The Physical
Development Plans – prepared under USMID for RHDs selected sub-counties and towns councils as per the National
Refugee Policy 2021 – provide guidance on operationalization of integrated planning and provision of services that benefit
both hosts and the forcibly displaced. These plans aligned with beneficiary needs as evidenced by an 85% beneficiary
satisfaction with the Project in RHD 17. Under the Systematic Land Adjudication and Certification (SLAAC) 7,180
beneficiaries received land titles which enhanced land tenure security and reduced conflicts between refugees and host
communities. Together, these experiences point to the need for a programmatic approach that integrates fiscal transfers,
institutional strengthening, governance reforms across sectors, and integrated planning and service provision.

18.      Lessons from USMID and GKMA-UDP underscore critical areas to be strengthened under UCMID. Investment
prioritization must be more strategic, ensuring that urban infrastructure directly supports economic activity, generates
jobs, and remains accessible to all. Intervention design should respond to diverse needs, particularly for Local Economic
Development (LED) facilities that drive local economic growth. The integration of refugees into urban environments must
be enhanced by improved access to infrastructure and social and economic services. Implementation delays highlight the
importance of early design, land acquisition, and contract management. Weak operations and maintenance (O&M)
threaten sustainability, calling for stronger incentives through disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) requirements for
adequate asset management systems. Gaps in environmental, social, health and safety (ESHS) compliance and land
acquisition points to the need for DLI targets linked to ESHS performance, as well as clearer procedures, stronger
institutional capacity, and targeted reforms. To address these challenges, a hybrid PforR program has been designed with
a limited investment project financing (IPF) project to strengthen national systems, ESHS risk management, and overall
program management capacity.

       II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION



17 Report No: ICR00129- Implementation Completion and Results report USMID




                                                                                                                  Page 15


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)            PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


19.       UCMID represents the next phase of Uganda’s urban reform agenda, positioning cities and municipalities at the
heart of job creation, productivity gains, and economic transformation. By channeling investment through economic
corridors, the Program will improve access to regional markets, reduce congestion, lower logistics costs, and enable small
and medium enterprises to thrive—particularly those employing youth and women. Reductions in congestion and flood-
related disruptions—reflected in fewer flood days—will increase market uptime, shorten travel times, and connect workers
more efficiently to jobs, thereby improving firm productivity and supporting better-quality, more sustainable employment.
UCMID will consolidate climate adaptation and mitigation into a single strategy, supporting investments in drainage, green
infrastructure, nature-based solutions, and low-carbon mobility. At least 60% of program-financed investments will deliver
measurable climate co-benefits. Linking fiscal transfers with strengthened PFM, procurement, and safeguard systems will
enhance accountability and ensure urban investments are climate-resilient, inclusive, and sustainable. The Program will
also strengthen urban resilience and inclusion, primarily by mitigating the impacts of refugee inflows and advancing
inclusive local economic development through expanded access to social services, markets, goods, and job opportunities
for both refugees and host communities. Most importantly, UCMID will institutionalize reforms that position cities as
drivers of Uganda Vision 2040 and Uganda NDPIV by aligning urban growth with a long-term jobs agenda, leveraging private
sector participation, and building governance systems that enable continuity and scale. Through these reforms, UCMID
will: (i) generate immediate construction jobs and create sustainable employment in urban services and operations, (ii)
stimulate local economies and entrepreneurship—especially for youth, women, and MSMEs, and (iii) foster inclusion and
skills development for Uganda’s next generation of urban workers.

   A. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO)

20.     The PDO is to enhance the institutional performance of selected urban local governments and ministries for urban
planning and management and improve access to climate smart infrastructure, services and jobs for urban residents and
displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas.

B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators
21.      The PDO is anchored in the achievement of outcome results linked to the Disbursement Link Results (DLRs) and
indicators under the Program’s three Results Areas (RAs): (i) RA1: Enhanced local and national level government
institutional capacity and performance for sustainable urban management, (ii) RA2: Increased access to climate smart
urban infrastructure, services and jobs, and (iii) RA3: Improved access to jobs and economic opportunities for the host
communities and refugees. The theory of change (ToC) demonstrates how these results areas and intermediate indicators
under each RA collectively contribute to the PDO. Performance-based grants will incentivize institutional development of
urban management, climate-smart infrastructure, and service delivery. The efforts aim to create more and better jobs in
urban areas. The previous USMID program created 24,359 jobs, of which 8,600 were from the refugee window. 10,097
jobs were short-term (4,268 from refugee window) while 14,262 (4,333 from refugee window) were permanent jobs.
Based on this, UCMID program aims to support the creation of at least 40,000 direct jobs - including 20,000 permanent
jobs in operations and services and 20,000 short-term jobs during construction as the results of the Program’s
interventions; of which 10,000 jobs will be for refugees and host communities, at least 5,000 permanent- while catalyzing
additional private sector employment through improved infrastructure and local economic development. The Program
will be financed through a combination of result-based financing and an IPF project to support technical support,
transaction advisory services, institutional reforms, and systems strengthening. A key feature of the Program is its focus
on performance incentives to drive institutional and infrastructure outcomes while enhancing accountability. The TOC
based on the three RAs is presented in a schematic diagram below.
PDO Level Results Indicators


                                                                                                                  Page 16


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                      The World Bank
                      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                                                    PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
                      Operation (P511300)



                 • Enhanced institutional capacity of city, municipal and national institutions for urban management (percentage), as
                     measured from the performance achievement of targets in the respective DLIs1-2, & 7 for LGs and DLIs 9-10 for
                     MDAs and verified during the annual performance assessment (APA) by an independent verification agent (IVA).
                 • People in urban areas provided with improved living conditions through access to climate smart infrastructure and
                     services (number) disaggregated by sex (number), by refugee hosting community (number) and refugee populations
                     (number) as measured through the achievement of targets set under DLI 3, 5 &7 and verified during the APA by an
                     IVA.
                 • People in urban areas provided with more and better jobs (number) disaggregated by sex (number) and by refugee
                     host community (number) and refugee populations (number) as measured according to the achievement of targets
                     specified for the intermediate indicators listed in Table 2. These are associated with DLIs 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8, and will
                     be verified during the APA by an IVA.

Figure 1: PforR Program Theory of Change

 Problem                       Weak institutional capacity, poor governance, lack of integrated planning and inadequate infrastructure, exacerbated by climate
 Statement                     change impacts are contributing to poor services and limited economic opportunities in Urban Areas

       PDO                     To enhance the institutional performance of selected urban local governments and ministries for urban planning and management and
                               improve access to climate smart infrastructure, services and jobs for urban residents and displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas

                              Activities                                          Outputs                                                     Outcomes
       RA1: Enhanced local and national level
       institutional capacity and performance                 A1                                                                    PDO                           Long-term
         for sustainable urban management                           Systems, strategies and tools developed and
                                                                   implemented for improved MDAs performance
                          Develop and implement                                                                             Enhanced capacity of

 IPF,DLI 9-10
                        systems/tools for improved                      Integrated planning tools and urban
                    functionality of the MDAs (MoLHUD                   management systems developed and                      national, city and
                                 and MoLG)                                         implemented                             municipal institutions for
                                                              A2                                                             urban planning and
                      Develop and implement integrated              Key staff appointed demonstrating improved                  management
                    planning tools and urban management                performance in agreed thematic areas
  DLI 1              systems to enhance governance for                                                                A4
                        City, Municipal and District LGs            Climate smart infrastructure investments and                Improved living                     Livable,
                                                                        services delivered with a focus on jobs               conditions through                   inclusive,
        RA 2: Improved access to sustainable                       (urban transport and mobility, drainages, green         access to climate-smart                  resilient
        urban infrastructure, services and jobs                               infrastructure, OSR, SWM)                       infrastructure and                  urban areas
                                                                                                                                 services; new
                   Plan, design, construct and rehabilitate           Local Economic Infrastructure Investments
                   urban roads, drainage systems, public                                                                    technologies adopted
                                                                        delivered focusing on jobs (NBS, SWM,
                         spaces, and facilities for local



 DLIs 2 – 6, 8
                                                                   Innovation centres, markets, taxi parks, tourism
                   economic development with a focus on       A3                    infrastructure)
                      climate mitigation and adaptation                                                                                                              Assumptions
                                                                                                                             More and better jobs
                                                                                                                                                        A1. Coordination across MDAs in
                    Develop and implement innovative                 Climate smart infrastructure strategy, SWM             created in urban areas         implementing new systems.
                     strategies, tools and processes to              strategy/plans, and innovative data-driven              and for Refugees and       A2. LGs have the political will to engage in
                    improve service delivery and O&M               digital solutions adopted, contributing to value           Host Communities;            institutional reforms
                                                              A2                      for money                                                         A3. Sufficient and timely budget allocation
                  RA 3: Improved access to jobs and                                                                                                        for infrastructure projects
                 economic opportunities for the host                Innovative Tools and Strategies developed for                                       A4. Effective Climate Risk Management in
                     communities and refugees                                           O&M                                                                place and factor into infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                           design, and LGs have adequate capacity
                       Planning, systems, design,                  Systems and tools adopted; physical development                                         to maintain urban infrastructure

   DLI 7- 8
                      construct local climate smart                     plans implemented; local climate-smart
                             Infrastructure                              infrastructure delivered focusing jobs




                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 17


                                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                                       PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
          Operation (P511300)


Table 1: UCMID Jobs Logic Model
    Results Areas & DLIs           Input (Eligible Investments)                     Intermediate Outcomes                             Jobs Outcomes
                                                                            (Urban Productivity & Economic Access)          (Short- & Long-Term Employment)
 RA1 – Institutional       • Strengthened local planning and revenue     • Better project readiness (RoW acquisition,   • Indirect job creation through faster
 capacity for              mobilization systems                          designs, permitting)                           investment turnaround and stronger local
 sustainable urban         • Strengthened -municipal-level capacity      • Improved service delivery and investment     business ecosystems
 management (DLIs 1,       and local planning through integration of     coordination                                   • Empowerment of women and youth
 9, 10, 7)                 refugee priorities into city and municipal    • Improved access and service delivery for     through enhanced local governance
                           development plans.                            refugees and host communities
                           • Climate-informed planning & ESHS            • Increased female representation in
                           enforcement                                   decision-making structures
                           • Operationalization of MDFs and
                           participatory decision-making
 RA2 – Access to           Pillar 1: Roads, junctions, NMT corridors,    • ↓ Travel time and congestion                 • ↑ Person-days of paid construction
 infrastructure and        parking, terminals                            • ↓ Flood exposure / flood days                work (incl. apprenticeships) including for
 services (DLIs 2–7)       Pillar 2: Drainage & flood mitigation         • ↑ Climate resilience and environmental       refugees and Hosts
 including for             Pillar 3: Green spaces, wetlands              quality                                        • ↑ Permanent jobs in urban
 refugees and HCs          restoration                                   • ↑ Market uptime and accessibility            infrastructure, O&M, waste management,
                           Pillar 4: Waste segregation, composting,      including for refugees and HCs                 and service delivery
                           small recycling PPPs                          • ↑ SME transactions and vendor                • ↑ Jobs in green-economy and tourism
                           Pillar 5: Markets, innovation hubs,           formalization including for refugees and HCs   • ↑ Youth and female labor participation
                           resource centres, smart city initiatives
 RA3 – Livelihoods         • Integrated local economic infrastructure    • Improved livelihood opportunities for host   • ↑ Refugee and host community
 and jobs for host         in WHR areas                                  and refugee populations                        participation in local labor markets
 communities &             • Market facilities, livelihood hubs,         • Expanded access to markets and services      • ↑ Youth and women-owned
 refugees (DLI 7)          vocational & skilling training centres,       • Strengthened social cohesion                 enterprises in formal economy
                           community amenities                                                                          • ↑ Livelihood resilience and income
                                                                                                                        diversification
 Cross-cutting (DLI 8)     • Systematic ESHS integration across          • Safer worksites and reduced or mitigated     • Better management of terms and
 ESHS enforcement          contracts and worksites                       social and environmental risks, improved       conditions of employment, occupational
 and compliance                                                          stakeholder engagement.                        health and safety risk management, and
                                                                                                                        sustained employment


Table 2: Urban Jobs Indicators
#        Intermediate Indicator               Definition & Measurement                 Timeline        Linked            Rationale              Disaggregation
                                                                                                        DLIs
        PDO indicator: People in urban areas provided with more and better jobs
1       Short-term jobs created      Number of person-days generated by civil       Short-term        DLI 3, 4,   Immediate employment       Sex, Youth, Host
        through infrastructure       works and community-based works (e.g.,         (construction)    5, 7 8      opportunities and safer    Community, Refugee
        investments                  roads, drainage, markets, green spaces),                                     labor conditions.
                                     meeting ESHS standards.
2       Permanent jobs created       Number of formal and informal jobs             Medium– to        DLI 4, 7    Sustains livelihoods and   Sex, Youth, Host
        through urban                sustained through operation, O&M, and          long-term                     supports economic          Community, Refugee
        infrastructure and LED       service delivery of urban infrastructure and                                 transformation beyond
        facilities                   LED facilities.                                                              construction.
3       Businesses supported         Number of SMEs, vendors, and enterprises       Medium– to        DLI 4, 7    Captures multiplier        Sex, Youth, Host
        through LED facilities and   (formal and informal) operate in or            long-term                     effects of LED             Community, Refugee
        infrastructure               supported by program-financed LED facilities                                 investments on local
                                     and infrastructure.                                                          economies.
4       People trained in            Number of trainees receiving technical,        Medium– to        DLI 4, 7    Builds human capital and   Sex, Youth, Host
        vocational and skilling      entrepreneurial, or job-readiness skills in    long-term                     enhances employability.    Community, Refugee
        facilities supported by the program-supported vocational and LED
        program                      training centers.




                                                                                                                                                          Page 18


                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                         PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       Operation (P511300)


 C. PforR Program Scope [Including IPF project]

Summary of on-going (or proposed) government program

22.      The Government of Uganda program (p) is the Sustainable Urbanization and Housing (SUH) is one of the
eighteen flagship programs under the NDPIV for the period 2025–2030, with the goal of “achieving higher household
incomes and employment for sustainable socio-economic transformation.” The government program includes five
strategic objectives covering urban infrastructure, physical planning, drainage and waste management, economic
opportunities, affordable housing and policy, legal and institutional strengthening. The UCMID Program (P) will cover a
subset of the SUH program targeting investment areas eligible for PforR funding. The program will cover ten cities, eleven
municipalities supported under the previous USMID Program, fifteen new municipalities and thirteen refugee-hosting
districts (RHDs). The new municipalities can only receive the program funds after meeting the minimum access conditions,
including demonstrating adequate institutional capacity and having approved institutional development plans.
Furthermore, implementation of the physical investments in the new municipalities is expected to commence in year two
after preparation of the subprojects designs and required environmental, social, health and safety (ESHS) risk
management documents and enhancing their ESHS risk management and capacities. The WHR shall focus on the economic
integration of host communities and refugees. Eligible urban areas in the RHDs 18 will be selected based on how well they
incorporate refugee needs into their plans and strategies, as outlined in the national refugee policy currently being
developed. Also, infrastructure in the selected urban areas will be prioritized based on their demonstrated initiatives to
provide economic opportunities and improving livelihoods for both refugees and the host communities.
Figure 2: The Government program and PforR Boundary

                                                               GoU 5-Year
                                                                National
                                                              Development
                                                                  Plan

                                                               GoU program
                                                                 (p) - US$
                                                                  1,454m




                                                                PforR (P) -
                                                                US$699m




23.    The Program is designed to achieve three Results Areas (RAs): RA1 – Enhanced local and national level
government institutional capacity and performance for sustainable urban management, will be financed through DLI1

18 Adjumani, Isingiro, Kikuube, Kyegegwa, Kamwenge, Kiryandongo, Lamwo, Madi-Okollo, Obongi, Terego, and Yumbe. Refugee information on Arua

and Moyo districts is yet to be provided. These two district local governments will become eligible when the government provides the required
refugee information.


                                                                                                                                    Page 19


                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)             PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       Operation (P511300)


(urban local government level) and DLIs 7, 9-10 (national level governments). RA2 – Increased access to sustainable urban
infrastructure, services and jobs, will be financed through DLIs 2 – 7 (urban local government level). RA3 - Improved
livelihoods and local economic opportunities for the host communities and refugees, will be financed under DLI 7 in the
urban areas of the refugee-hosting districts under the WHR. Cross-cutting objectives of ESHS compliance and performance
monitoring will be reinforced through DLI 8, which ensures the systematic integration and enforcement of ESHS provisions
across all contracts. Complementing this, the IPF project will provide targeted technical support to strengthen institutional
capacity and support the effective achievement of the PforR DLIs.

24.      The Program will facilitate the implementation of climate-smart capital investments and planning. All
participating entities will be required to develop a Five-Year Capital Investment Plan (CIP), which will be consolidated into
a National CIP for the program. These plans will ensure that climate and disaster risk considerations—encompassing both
adaptation and mitigation—are fully integrated into investment decisions at the city and municipal levels. The program
will support development of climate-smart local development plans. The urban local governments, including those hosting
large numbers of refugees will be supported to formulate institutional strengthening plans which incorporate disaster risk
sensitivity, utilizing hazard and risk information, and promoting low-carbon, green urban development. This will be
achieved by defining more compact, connected urban forms and designating urban green spaces, among other
approaches. The Program will also incentivize climate-smart urban infrastructure investments which consider both current
and future climate conditions. Urban local governments will select sub-projects from an investment menu that supports
climate adaptation and disaster risk reduction (including roadside drainage, retention walls, and nature-based or hybrid
grey-green solutions) as well as climate mitigation (such as non-motorized mobility solutions like bicycle lanes, walkways,
and urban green areas).

25.     The Program aims to facilitate the transition towards climate smart urban development and green growth, in
alignment with the priority actions for urban areas defined in Uganda’s NDC 2022 and the Green Growth Strategy
2016/2017-2030/2031. The design incorporates green, sustainability and climate resilience principles and practices.
Climate-smart infrastructure is public investments in urban infrastructure that consider current and expected future
changes in climate conditions with the aim to mitigate GHG emission (i.e. facilitate low carbon urban development) and/or
reduce the impact of climate related hazards, such as floods or extreme heat. 19 The UCMID program will use the PforR
incentive structure to leverage a combination of planning and infrastructure investments at scale across all entities
supported.

26.      The Program will prioritize local economic infrastructure and provide incentives that foster business
development and entrepreneurship to boost urban revenues, create jobs, increase incomes, and reduce urban poverty
for long-term resilience. The pillar on local economic development and job creation in the investment menu includes
strategic infrastructure investments which include construction and upgrading of local markets and business hubs,
sustainable urban tourism development (eco-tourism, cultural tourism, etc.), urban green and climate-smart resource
centres, innovation hubs and incubation centres, environmentally healthy slaughter slabs/houses. In RHD, the program
will prioritize local infrastructures that support efficient movement of people and goods from the settlements to urban
areas, including cities and towns, unlock economic opportunities for refugees and hosts communities, and allowing access
to urban areas (including cities and towns) for production and livelihoods (e.g. construction and upgrading markets).
USMID will complement the efforts under other WHR projects such as Generating Growth Opportunities and Productivity
for Women Enterprises Project (P176747), aiming to support high potential value chains in settlements through block
farming and cooperatives. For urban refugees, infrastructures should provide incentives that foster business development


19 cf. World Bank, 2022. Reference Guide for Climate-Smart Public Investment




                                                                                                                     Page 20


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                     PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


and entrepreneurship in cities in line with the current dialogue with GoU on urban refugees' status paving the way for
refugees' resilience and self-reliance.

 Table 3. Urban Development Grant (UDG) eligible and non-eligible investment/expenditure menu

                                                       ELIGIBLE INVESTMENTS
  Pillar and Objective                          Indicative Investments
  Pillar 1: Urban Roads and Mobility            1. Roads’ upgrading/rehabilitation and associated investments to improve
  Objective: To promote efficient movement           mobility and connectivity (bridges, box culverts, cycle lanes, traffic
  of people and goods,                               lights/junctions and solar streetlights).
  fostering economic development by             2. Non-Motorized Transport (NMT) corridors (pedestrian walkways).
  connecting people to jobs and markets;        3. Parking lanes/facilities including electric vehicles (EVs) charging stations and
  social inclusion; environmental                   smart parking systems.
  sustainability; and urban livability.         4. Construction and upgrading of transport terminals (bus, lorry and taxi parks).
  Pillar 2: Urban Drainage and Flood            1. Primary and secondary drainage systems (control/manage stormwater,
  Mitigation                                         mitigate flooding, improve water quality and support climate resilience).
  Objective: To enhance climate resilience by   2. Sustainable urban drainage systems (incorporate nature and green
  protecting physical and economic assets,           infrastructures to reduce urban flooding, increase groundwater recharge and
  lives, and livelihoods in the urban                improve water quality).
  landscape.
  Pillar 3: Nature-based Solutions (NbS)        1.   Urban green spaces and parks (public parks, urban forests and tree canopies,
  and Green Infrastructure                           green plazas and other nature-based recreational spaces for urban tourism)
  Objective: To promote sustainable and         2.   Restoration of wetlands, flood plains, and constructed wetlands to improve
  climate-resilient urban development and            water quality, manage runoff and reduce flood risks
  job creation.                                 3.   Green corridors and green streets
                                                4.   Rain gardens, bioswales, vegetated swales and permeable surfaces to reduce
                                                     run-off and flooding, while at the same time improving water quality and
                                                     supporting biodiversity.
                                                5.   Rainwater harvesting systems to capture and store rainwater in public and
                                                     institutional buildings (as well as residential/commercial areas) for reuse.
                                                6.   Restoration of degraded landscapes and wastelands.
  Pillar 4: Sustainable Solid Waste             1.   Strengthening waste segregation at source and material recovery facilities
  Management                                    2.   Small scale waste recycling initiatives that include strengthening public-
  Objective: To promote urban resilience             private partnerships
  through sustainable and climate-smart         3.   Community waste composting initiatives to produce organic fertilizers for
  urban infrastructure and reduce                    urban and peri-urban agriculture.
  GHG emissions.
  Pillar 5: Economic Development and Job        1.   Construction and upgrading of markets, innovation hubs and incubation
  Creation                                           centers.
  Objective: To promote business                2.   Sustainable urban tourism development (eco-tourism, cultural tourism,
  development and entrepreneurship, create           community tourism, local business hubs).
  jobs, boost urban revenues, increase          3.   Urban green and climate-smart resource centers.
  incomes and improve livelihoods.              4.   Slaughterhouses/slaughter slabs (hygienic and climate smart).
                                                5.   Smart City Initiatives (leveraging technology and data analytics).
                                                6.   Sports infrastructure/play fields.



                                                                                                                              Page 21


                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                           PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
          Operation (P511300)


                                           NON-ELIGIBLE INVESTMENTS AND EXPENDITURE
     The following category of investments will be excluded from the UDG:
     1.   Activities that are high risk, including: (i) road widening or similar infrastructure investments that trigger significant land
          acquisition and compensation and require RAP costs beyond the financing capacity of participating Local Governments; (ii)
          sub-projects that would cause displacement of affected persons from their property or that adversely affect their
          livelihoods where implementing entities cannot finance compensation at market value and transaction costs; and (iii) Bus
          Rapid Transit (BRT); (iv) Large Solid Waste Management (SWM) infrastructure and landfills, and (v) slum upgrading.
     2.   Investments that are for private use, e.g., private markets, private workspaces, and private car/taxi parks.
     3.   The following types of public investments (vehicles except those for specialized use as defined in the OIM, new office
          buildings, any investments that do not fall under the five pillars of the investment menu).


27.      Right of way and Land acquisition: World Bank Program-for-Results Financing (PforR) Policy (paragraph 9)
requires the country’s environmental and social systems to manage land acquisition and loss of access to natural resources
in a way that avoids or minimizes displacement, and assists the affected people in improving, or at the minimum restoring,
their livelihoods and living standards. This includes paying compensation to affected people at the replacement cost of
any land that is taken from them under the Program. No acquisition of land is anticipated under the Program that would
require affected people to be relocated from their land. Any land or assets that need to be acquired under the Program
will be compensated in-kind, or in cash at replacement cost. PforR Directive (paragraph 30), which applies to this Program,
requires the Bank’s evaluation of country systems as detailed in the ESSA to consider to what degree Program systems
incorporate elements of good practice, such as those set forth in the ESF, including its ESS5 and footnote 10. Accordingly,
any investments where the right-of-way acquisition does not follow the requirements of para 9 of PforR Policy, para 30
(b) and (i) of the Bank Directive on PforRs, as well as elements of good environmental and social risk management practice
that informed the evaluation of Program systems, such as other relevant approved Bank Policy, will not be eligible for
financing under this operation. This will be further and explicitly detailed in relevant Program documentation. The
operation will ensure the readiness conditions 20 for the subprojects are met before signing any work contract.

Proposed UCMID Program boundary

28.       Intervention areas considered risky for implementation under the PforR arrangement will be excluded. The
following areas of the government program will not be included: (i) public transport, especially the BRT and light rail transit
(LRT), (ii) SWM infrastructure, especially brown fields, and (iii) housing development services and institutions.

 Table 4: The Government Program expenditure boundaries

                   Government program (p)            PforR Program                                            Reasons for non-alignment

     Objective     To develop and maintain urban     To enhance the institutional performance of              PforR Program objective is almost
                   infrastructure, appropriate       participating urban local governments and relevant       aligned to the government
                   drainage and waste                ministries for urban planning and management, and        objective except for affordable
                   management systems reduce         improve access to sustainable infrastructure, services   housing which is not supported
                   affordable housing deficit and    and local economic opportunities for urban residents     under the PforR.
                   increase economic                 and displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas.
                   opportunities in urban areas.


20
   Readiness conditions are defined in paragraph 49 and under the Verification Protocols for Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLI2) in Annex 1 of
this document and further detailed in the Performance Assessment Tool, ESSA and other Program documentation.


                                                                                                                                          Page 22


                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                               PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        Operation (P511300)



  Duration        2025-2030                           2026-2032                                                  PforR Program aligned with
                                                                                                                 Government program
  Geographic      All the country                     2 MDAs, 10 cities, 26 Municipalities spread                The selected urban areas 22are the
  coverage 21                                         throughout the country and 11 districts hosting            top priority of government and
                                                      refugees                                                   engagement for the Bank.
  Results         RA1-5 under government              Only selected parts of RA1,2, 4 and 5:                     Certain elements under the
  areas           program.                            Result Areas (RAs) are:                                    government program RAs are not
                  Result Areas (RAs) are:             RA1 – Enhanced local and national level government         supported/eligible under PforR.
                  1. Develop and maintain urban                                                                  The following are excluded:
                                                      institutional capacity and performance for
                     infrastructure in line with      sustainable urban management.                              • Public Transportation (BRT, LRT)
                     physical development plans.                                                                    in RA 1,
                  2. Develop appropriate              RA2 – Increased access to sustainable urban                • Land banking system for
                     drainage and waste               infrastructure, services and local economic                   foresighted urban infrastructure
                     management systems.              opportunities.                                                and affordable housing in RA1,
                  3. Reduce the affordable            RA 3 - Improved livelihoods and local economic             • Development of waste
                     decent housing deficit.          opportunities for the host communities and refugees.          management infrastructure
                  4. Increase economic                                                                              (landfill) in RA2,
                     opportunities in urban areas.                                                               • Housing development services
                  5. Strengthening the policy,                                                                      and institutions established and
                     legal, institutional, and                                                                      strengthened in RA3.
                     coordination frameworks.
  Overall         $1,454M                             $699M of which IDA is $513M
  Financing


Program Beneficiaries

29.       The Program will directly benefit 5.6 million people, of which 1.6 million will be from the refugee-hosting
districts (600,000 refugees). The direct beneficiaries include urban residents in program cities, municipalities, and districts
hosting refugees. These communities will benefit from improved access to essential urban infrastructure and services—
such as all-weather roads, stormwater drainage, street lighting, public markets, and other urban amenities. These
investments will enhance mobility, reduce flood risks, and improve public safety, while also stimulating local economic
activity.

30.      Due to recent cuts in humanitarian aid, many refugees have moved from settlements to urban areas to find
better social services and livelihood opportunities (UNHCR). This movement is placing increased pressure on existing
social services and infrastructure and poses risks to social cohesion and peaceful coexistence between the refugees and
host communities. The project seeks to address these challenges by enhancing infrastructure to accommodate the
growing population by unlocking economic opportunities and jobs for both refugees and host communities in urban areas.
The population in refugee settlements and surrounding host communities will benefit from improved access to markets,
social services, and economic opportunities and jobs.

31.    By program completion, the UCMID program aims to create about 20,000 permanent jobs, including 5,000 in
refugees and host communities, in market operations, maintenance services, waste management, and logistics.

21 This covers all the 10 cities and 11 municipalities supported in the previous USMID Program to consolidate the achievements, 15 new municipalities

to enhance their capacity to deliver urban services.
22The implementing entities have been selected based on considerations for Regional Development, prioritization of gazetted cities and
municipalities, hosting high number of refugees and availability of the institutional capacity to plan, implement and maintain the urban infrastructure.
Furthermore, the minimum condition (DLI2) requires the implementing entities to have a Five-Year Investment Plan, maintain throughout the
program minimum key staff in position and ensure clean audits are a prerequisite for any entity to receive program funds.


                                                                                                                                              Page 23


                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


Strengthened infrastructure and better market access will lower business costs, boost demand for labor, and increase
household incomes, especially benefiting women, youth, and low-income groups. Expanded urban infrastructure will also
foster a more supportive environment for informal and small businesses, vendors, and traders to succeed.

32.     Local Governments in RHDs will benefit from performance-based grants and technical support to strengthen their
capacity in planning (and include refugees' needs in RHDs), budgeting, procurement, safeguards, local revenue
mobilization, creation of more and better jobs, and delivery of climate-smart infrastructure investments with due regard
to value for money. Town Clerks, Chief Administrative Officers, engineers, planners, treasurers, commercial officers, and
other municipal officials will receive targeted support to improve service delivery and accountability.
33.    National institutions particularly the MoLHUD, Ministry of Local Government (MoLG), NPA will benefit from
improved and coordinated urban platforms, enhanced capacity to guide urban policy, and digital systems for planning and
monitoring.
34.     Contractors and local service providers, including consulting firms and construction companies, will benefit from
increased demand for infrastructure delivery and professional services. Over the six-year implementation period, it is
estimated that around 20,000 short- to medium-term jobs will be created through construction activities and related
services, including 5,000 for refugees and hosts communities providing income opportunities for workers, particularly
youth, in participating urban areas. This will have strong multiplier effects on local economies through forward and
backward linkages, further supporting inclusive urban growth and job creation.

35.      Indirect beneficiaries include the broader urban population across Uganda, who will benefit as improved policies,
standards, and planning systems are adopted nationally. They will gain access to shared urban infrastructure and services
designed to support inclusion, resilience, and social cohesion. Enhanced institutional performance at the central and local
government levels will improve the efficiency and quality of urban management beyond the program areas. In addition,
the private sector, including contractors, service providers, and SMEs, will benefit from an improved investment climate
and stronger municipal systems that lower transaction costs and enable greater participation in urban service delivery and
infrastructure provision.

36.     Development partners and future investors will benefit from strengthened institutional systems that improve
transparency, fiduciary performance, and readiness for scale-up and co-financing, contributing to sustainable urban
development across Uganda.

Program Expenditure Framework

37.      Description and Assessment of the Program Expenditure Framework: Funding of the Government program is
reflected in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF), which indicates an amount of US$ 186.30 million from
government budget will be provided to support PforR (P) DLIs achievement. Government of Uganda has robust systems
including a well-developed budget classification system to track and report on government expenditures under the
Program using the Program Budgeting System (PBS). The PBS, together with the Integrated Financial Management
Information System (IFMIS) will streamline the Program reporting. All participating cities, municipalities, and district LGs
will be required to use IFMIS. There is value added by the PforR Program resources, especially regarding green, low-carbon
and climate resilient elements. There are binding constraints faced by the Government in delivering intended results. The
PforR Program with a total cost of US$699.29 million will be financed from the government counterpart funding of
US$186.30million and World Bank funding of US$513 million. UCMID PforR being 48.1% of SUH, reflects Government
commitment, ownership and likelihood of sustaining the Program. The government counterpart funding comes from
anticipated expenditures that support achieving the PforR results by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban

                                                                                                                    Page 24


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        Operation (P511300)


Development; the Ministry of Local Government; the ten cities, twenty-six municipal councils; and thirteen districts
hosting refugees. This funding is not new money allocated by the government for Program implementation. The
government has a well-developed LG grant structure. Once the Program resources are reflected in the external resource
envelope, the Sustainable Urbanization and Housing Program will be activated in the transfers to LGs captured on the
Online Transfer Information Management System (OTIMS).

PforR Program (US$ 513 million) will support 3 windows as described below.
38.      Window 1 – Institutional Capacity enhancement (US$ 35 million). This window will finance system strengthening
and capacity building at the national and local levels: (i) At the national level, US$15 million (2.9%) will provide institutional
strengthening for MoLHUD (as coordinating ministry), the Ministry of Local Government (with the mandate to support
local governments). MoLHUD will coordinate with the National Planning Authority (NPA), Ministry of Gender, Labor and
Social Development (MoGLSD) and the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) to enhance planning and
ESHS systems; (ii) At the local level, US$20 million (3.9%) will support cities and municipalities to strengthen their
institutional performance and service delivery systems.

39.      Window 2 - Climate smart urban infrastructure, services and local economic development (US$ 405.8 million).
The window will finance performance-based development grants in two main areas: (i) Development grants for 10 cities
based on the unique needs of these cities, with an annual average per capita allocation of $21, translating to US$ 250
million (49.1.3%) of the Program funds, (ii) Development grants for 26 municipalities to be admitted to the program based
on meeting the minimum access conditions, an annual average per capita allocation of $16, translating into US$ 155.8
million (30.4%). The allocation of funds under Window 2 to the respective local governments will be based on the
government allocation formula 23. Based on the per capita proposed allocations, each city will receive between US$17.68
-35.89 million (average $25.42 million) while the municipalities will receive between US$3.30 – 13.32 million (average
$6.18 million).

40.     Window 3: Window for Host Communities and Refugees (WHR) PforR of US$ 77.2 million. The window will
provide performance-based grants to eleven refugee-hosting districts, focusing on strengthening the institutional capacity
of these districts in planning, strategy development, and improvement of local climate-smart infrastructure investments.
This support aims strengthen local government’s capacity to include refugees' needs and hosting impacts in planning and
subsequent plan implementation – including infrastructure investments. Key planning activities include integrating
refugee needs and hosting impacts into district development plans and strengthening coordination between local and
national stakeholders that manage impacts of refugee hosting. The proposed local climate smart investments, identified
through plans, are designed to transform the access to services and livelihoods of both host communities and refugees,
paving the way for refugees’ self-reliance. With an annual average per capita allocation of $5, totaling US$ 77.2 million,
each district hosting refugees is expected to receive between US$3.12 – 13.39 (average $6.15 million).

41.      The program will unlock economic opportunities for refugees and their hosts by linking settlements and their
surrounding hosting areas to cities and towns and opening new opportunities for refugees and their immediate hosts in
cities and towns, while also supporting urban areas in managing the impacts of inflows. Additionally, the investments will
stimulate cross-border trade and facilitate the movement of goods and passengers between the refugee-hosting districts
and major cities and towns, further expanding economic opportunities and supporting sustainable job creation in the
region. A key component is also the development of skills needed and creation of jobs, particularly during the construction

23
  The Government allocation formula is based on three parameters: (i) Fixed allocation (30%), (ii) Population allocation (55%), and (iii) Poverty
head count allocation (15%).


                                                                                                                                             Page 25


                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        Operation (P511300)


phase, where refugees will be prioritized by the districts and will receive targeted training if needed and access to
employment opportunities. The Program will give priority to refugees on some specific jobs related to early- stage of work
such as clearing/excavation that require little knowledge and skills. This approach ensures that both nationals and refugees
directly benefit from new jobs in infrastructure construction, services, and related sectors.

42.      IPF Project (US$ 27 million, of which $2.8 million is financed by WHR window for refugee host districts). The IPF
project is designed to directly support the achievement of the Program Development Objectives and Disbursement-Linked
Indicators (DLIs) by financing upstream activities that enable effective implementation and results delivery under the
PforR. It will focus on financing an integrated package of support across six areas: (i) policy reforms, strategies, and systems
development; (ii) program management and verification; (iii) digital innovations and planning tools; (iv) subproject
preparation and design; (v) ESHS strengthening; and (vi) dedicated design support to window for host communities and
refugees. It will finance a sequenced policy agenda, including amendment of the Physical Planning Act, update of the
National Urban Policy and urban legal framework, preparation of a climate-smart and inclusive infrastructure framework,
enhancement of municipal revenue/IRAS systems, and development of an SWM materials recovery strategy.
Implementation will be coordinated by MoLHUD, with support for core management functions such as IVA, value-for-
money and procurement audits, reviews/evaluations, beneficiary feedback and impact assessments, while MoGLSD and
NEMA will support labor/OHS oversight and environmental compliance monitoring. The project will also finance an AI-
enabled Urban Data and GIS platform, Cities and Municipalities PDP preparation, engineering and green/NBS designs,
SWM strategy updates, and storm-water master plans to improve investment readiness. ESHS support will include audits,
grievance systems, stakeholder engagement, land due diligence/cadaster updates, and capacity building on ESHS, while
the host communities and refugees window will support analytics, design, supervision, verification, land titling due
diligence, and field supervision logistics.

43.     NEMA and MoGLSD (and their decentralized labor and environmental officers) will be supported under the IPF
project to conduct systematically quarterly supervision of works under the Program, as well as random spot checks, and
provision of support in case of environmental accidents and incidents (NEMA) and accidents, incidents and grievances in
connection with labor and working conditions, including occupational health and safety (OHS) (MoGLSD). The details of
the ESHS supervision arrangements between different Government entities will be set forth in dedicated Memorandums
of Understanding. These arrangements will supplement and reinforce the regular contractual supervision arrangements
(Supervision Consultant) that we will be put in place.

44.     Whereas this operation combines a PforR Program and a limited IPF project, the PforR follows the PforR Policy
Core Principles and Directive; it does not apply the ESF standards. The IPF project on the other hand will apply the ESF
Environmental and Social Standards (ESS1–10) as may be applicable to the IPF-financed activities only.

Program Financing

Table 5: Program Expenditure Framework for PforR including government counterpart funding
                                                                       1           2           3               4     5         6         Total
                                   24                               2026/27     2027/28     2028/29      2029/30   2030/31   2031/32
         Expenditure Framework
         Total Pfor R                                               136.05      158.56      154.16       137.33    111.70               699.29
  1.0    Government Funding (US$186M)                               25.05       30.06       36.07        43.28     51.85                186.30
  1.1    Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development            0.80        0.97        1.16         1.39      1.67                 5.99


24 The details of the expenditure framework for each city, municipality and district are included in Annex 3




                                                                                                                                        Page 26


                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                   PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        Operation (P511300)


 1.2     Ministry of Local Government                         0.62       0.75       0.89        1.07         1.29                  4.62
 1.3     10 City councils                                     8.50       10.20      12.24      14.69        17.63                  63.26
 1.4     26 Municipal Councils                                9.59       11.51      13.81      16.57        19.88                  71.36
 1.5     13 Districts Hosting refugees                        5.53       6.64       7.96        9.56        11.38                  41.07
 2.0     IDA Financing (US$513M)                             111.00     128.50     118.09      94.05        59.85                 513.00
         Window 1: Institutional Capacity enhancement (
 2.1     US$30M)                                                5.85     5.85       5.69       5.55         5.55      1.50        30.00
2.1.1    Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development       1.80     1.80       1.80       1.80         1.80      1.00        10.00
2.1.2    Ministry of Local Government                           0.90     0.90       0.90       0.90         0.90      0.50         5.00
2.1.3    10 City councils                                       0.88     0.88       0.83       0.79         0.79      0.00         4.17
2.1.4    26 Municipal Councils                                  2.28     2.28       2.16       2.06         2.06      0.00        10.83
         Window 2: Climate Smart Urban Infrastructure,
         services and local Economic development (US$
 2.2     405.8M)                                                93.35   101.45      93.35      73.00        44.65                 405.80
2.2.1    City Development grant                                 57.50    62.50      57.50      45.00        27.50                 250.00
2.2.2    Municipal Development Grant                            35.85    38.95      35.85      28.00        17.15                 155.80
         Window 3: Window for Host Communities and
2.3.     Refugees (WHR) PforR of USD 80M                        11.80    21.20      19.05      15.50        9.65                  77.20
2.3.1    Institutional Strengthening Grants (ISG) for RHD        1.00     1.00       1.00       1.00        1.00                   5.00
2.3.2    Urban Development grant for WHR                        10.80    20.20      18.05      14.50        8.65                  72.20
         UCMID as a percent of Government Funding (p)                                                                             48.1%


D. Disbursement Linked Indicators
 Table 6: Disbursement Linked Indicators and Financing allocations
 Components/Purpose of DLI                    DLI Description                                                         Financing
                                                                                                                      allocated
                                                                                                                    (US$, Millions)
 PforR Program

 To ensure implementing Local                 DLI 1: Program LGs, including refugee hosting districts, met the             20
 Governments (LGs) have the minimum           Institutional Strengthening Grants (ISG) minimum required              (US$15m from
 required capacity to access and manage       access conditions, including climate resilient urban planning and     IDA and US$5m
 the ISG, integrate the ESHS risk             designs, ESHS risk management and own-source revenue (OSR)               from WHR)
 management capacity building and             improvement action plans and targets set out in the verification
 urban climate resilient planning.            protocols through the APA.
 To ensure implementing LGs meet the          DLI 2: Program LGs met the minimum required access                             70
 minimum required capacity requirement        conditions for Urban Development Grants (UDG) as measured
 to access and manage the Urban               by substantive appointment of key staff, established basic
 Development Grants (UDG) and                 competencies in development planning, financial management,
 integrate climate resilient designs in all   and ESHS risk management, including 80% readiness conditions
 investments.                                 met for the design package as verified through the Annual
                                              Performance Assessment (APA).
 To ensure that infrastructure                DLI 3: Program LGs prepared and implemented their action                       85
 investments integrate climate resilience,    plans and delivered climate-risk and ESHS compliant works as
 low-carbon measures and ESHS                 verified through the APA by the IVA.
 requirements.
 To prioritize local economic investments     DLI 4: Program LGs planned and delivered climate smart                     80.8
 which integrate climate change               strategic local economic infrastructure investments targets




                                                                                                                                  Page 27


                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                 PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
         Operation (P511300)


 adaptation and mitigation for jobs         which generate employment opportunities as assessed through
 creation.                                  APA by an IVA.
 To ensure value for money                  DLI 5: Program LGs achieved value for money targets in the                 70
 sustainability, ESHS and climate change    implementation of climate smart infrastructure investments,
 adaptation and mitigation for all          demonstrating economy, efficiency, effectiveness, and ESHS
 investments.                               management as assessed by the Office of Auditor General
                                            through annual Value for Money Audits.
 To ensure operations and maintenance       DLI 6: Average annual score of Program LGs that achieved the               65
 (O&M) are prioritized, funded, and         annual set targets in funding and executing O&M plans for all
 implemented to ensure sustainable          major urban infrastructure as verified through APA by an IVA.
 investments.
 To prioritize and deliver local            DLI 7: Program LGs planned and delivered climate smart
 investments that are climate smart and     strategic local economic infrastructures targets that addressed       67.2(all from
 transformative and generate economic       the needs and generated economic opportunities for refugees              WHR)
 opportunities for refugees and HCs         and host communities as assessed through the APA by and an
                                            IVA.
 To enhance institutional capacity on       DLI 8: Program LGs, including refugee hosting districts, met               40
 ESHS management and risk mitigation.       compliance targets demonstrating integration, enforcement and        ($35m from IDA
                                            monitoring of ESHS provisions in all contracts and application of     and $5m from
                                            sanctions for non-performance in cities, municipalities and               WHR)
                                            refugee host districts.
 To enhance decentralized service           DLI 9: MoLG executed annual performance improvement plans                  5
 delivery and local revenue generation.     (PIPs) for program LGs which includes filling all key staff
                                            positions, at least 10% annual OSR increase and effective
                                            utilization and implementation of local economic plans as
                                            assessed by the APA.
 To strengthen urban and climate smart      DLI 10: MoLHUD executed annual performance improvement                     10
 investment planning, coordination and      plans (PIPs) for program LGs which includes risk informed urban
 management systems.                        and investment planning, sustainable urban transport and
                                            valuation services as confirmed through APA.
 IPF Project                                 MoLHUD with support from consultants and technical experts,
 To support development of some             develops and implements policy reforms, digital tools, and                  27
 detailed design investment packages        systems for smart climate integrated urban planning, improved          ($24.2m from
 that will then be included and             municipal land administration and development control,                IDA and $2.8m
 constructed under the PforR, policy        climate/disaster risk management, ESHS risk management                  from WHR)
 reforms, system strengthening              (including capacity enhancement for MoGLSD and NEMA) low-
 (including ESHS), climate adaptation and   carbon growth, and decentralized service delivery, urban
 mitigation measures integration and        refugee policy & management. This includes Program
 program oversight.                         Management (supervision, quality assurance, independent
                                            verification of Program results, audits, Program reviews). The IPF
                                            also supports the development of detailed designs for some
                                            urban infrastructure investments that will be included and
                                            constructed under the PforR program.
 Total                                                                                                                540


E. Role of Partners
Table 7: The role of Partners in urban development in Uganda


                                                                                                                            Page 28


                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                 PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)



  Name of Partner                          Nature of Involvement /Description
  Agence Française de Développement        Co-financed the GKMA Urban Development Program with the WB
  (AFD)
  European Union (EU)                      Financing green urban initiatives in Kampala, GKMA and Gulu city
  African Development Bank (AfDB)          Engaged in Uganda’s urban sector, particularly through regional infrastructure,
                                           roads project in Kampala Capital City. Small towns water and sanitation projects
  Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank     AIIB has expressed interest to the GoU in co- or parallel financing of urban
  (AIIB)                                   infrastructure


46.       Role of Development Partners. Several development partners are actively engaged in Uganda’s urban
development agenda, providing complementary support across different geographic areas and thematic priorities. The
AFD co-finances the GKMA Urban Development Program with the World Bank and supports urban infrastructure
investments in selected urban areas outside UCMID’s coverage. The EU finances green and climate-resilient urban
initiatives in GKMA and Gulu (a city under UCMID), complementing the Program’s focus on sustainable urban growth. The
AfDB supports regional infrastructure, e.g. Busega-Mpigi and Kagitumba-Kayonza-Rusumo Roads Project, Kampala – Jinja
expressway, EAC railway rehabilitation, Kampala roads rehabilitations, and has expressed interest in future phases of city
development programs, while the AIIB has indicated interest in co- or parallel financing of urban infrastructure. Under
UCMID, development partners are expected to contribute through parallel financing, policy dialogue, and technical
collaboration in key areas such as corridor-based urban investment, climate resilience, local economic development, and
solid waste management. Coordination will be maintained through the Urban Development Partners Group (UDPG) and
alignment with the National Development Plan IV to ensure synergies, complementarity, and coherence across ongoing
and planned initiatives.

F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Program Design

47.     USMID’s Program incentive structure enhanced the capacity of local governments in planning and service
delivery. The Program aligned the incentives of the central government with those of the local governments around a
common set of DLIs, with the MoLHUD charged with overseeing the annual assessments, ensuring key municipal staff
were in place, and building capacity of local authorities. Capacity development covered critical thematic areas of planning,
budgeting, own source revenue (OSR) enhancement, infrastructure design and execution, procurement, environmental,
social health and Safety management, accounting and financial management. The formation and empowerment of
City/Municipal development forums (C/MDFs) under USMID exemplified stakeholder engagement, representing citizens’
interests in directing investments and ensuring transparency, accountability, and feedback. MDFs have contributed to
securing citizens’ trust and leadership confidence, which has supported project implementation and other LG activities
even beyond USMID. The C/MDFs stakeholder engagement structure will be maintained and thematic areas where
capacity remains low will be incorporated into the institutional support.

48.      USMID Infrastructure improvements in Urban areas resulted into positive economic outcomes and transformed
the face of urban centres in Uganda. Improved road networks increased connectivity and access to better services and
jobs, reduced travel times, increased property values and improved local revenue performance. Drainage systems
performance was improved and solid waste management, and greening/beautification of urban spaces increased urban
resilience while installation of street lighting improved security and road safety and provided opportunities for businesses
to operate for longer hours at night generating more revenue. The investment menu under UCMID has been strategically
selected focusing on climate smart criteria to sustain urban infrastructure and service delivery, to provide local economic
opportunities and jobs.


                                                                                                                         Page 29


                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                          PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       Operation (P511300)


49.      Sequencing investment planning, physical preparation of sites, and contract management reduces
implementation delays. Several delays in USMID implementation were related to site-specific issues, including the
acquisition of right of way (RoW), engineering designs that were subjected to changes during post contract award, and
poor contract management practices at the entity level. UCMID program will ensure that implementing entities have
demonstrated readiness for execution as follows: (a) at effectiveness, a minimum of 30% of investments designs must be
completed with prepared RAPS and ESIAs, (b) prior to signing any works contract, Local governments must provide: (i)
approved RAPs and ESIAs, (ii) evidence of RoW acquisitions obtained from both PAPs and implementing entities, including
all relevant compensation for land acquisition at market value and transaction cost, including where paragraph 27 is
applicable, (iii) proof of of engagement between implementing entities and the utility agencies, and (iv) strip maps
showing illustrating at last 40% of uninterrupted ROW sections. The MOLHUD and NPA will support
local governments institutional strengthening for capital investment planning.

50.     Refugee hosting districts demonstrated that inclusive, and result-based approaches can improve joint planning,
provide integrated urban infrastructure and service delivery, and foster social cohesion for both refugees and host
communities. Furthermore, SLAAC enhanced land tenure security and reduced conflicts between refugees and host
communities. However, challenges in coordination, capacity, sustainability, and environmental, social, health, and safety
management remain. Future interventions should build on these lessons to strengthen systems, foster partnerships, and
ensure that development benefits are shared equitably and sustainably.

F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Program Design

51.     Refugee hosting districts demonstrated that inclusive, and result-based approaches can improve joint planning,
provide integrated urban infrastructure and service delivery, and foster social cohesion for both refugees and host
communities. Furthermore, SLAAC enhanced land tenure security and reduced conflicts between refugees and host
communities. However, challenges in coordination, capacity, sustainability, and environmental, social, health, and safety
management remain. Future interventions should build on these lessons to strengthen systems, foster partnerships, and
ensure that development benefits are shared equitably and sustainably.

52.      USMID identified O&M as a weak link which was a threat to long-term sustainability. The government's
inadequate investment in O&M and manual selection of priorities was considered risks to sustainability of the investments
under USMID. A global assessment of World Bank PforRs indicated that combining capacity-building support and
substantive technical support was key for improving performance areas such as OSR collection, 25 critical for longer-term
O&M. UCMID has been designed to ensure that O&M challenges are addressed by including a DLI to provide incentives
and ensure that O&M is well planned, prioritized and executed. The design will incorporate digital technology for selection
and prioritization of maintenance and enhance capacity for asset management. Further, the program will undertake a
costing analysis of the latest technologies on streetlighting to ensure greater value for money (VfM) and operational
efficiency is achieved.

53.     Environmental, Social, Health and Safety (ESHS) management. Implementation of ESHS under the GKMA-UDP
and USMID has revealed critical weaknesses, despite Uganda’s adequate legal framework. These Programs recorded
multiple fatalities and serious incidents, highlighting systemic shortcomings in contractor compliance, insufficient staffing
for ESHS supervision, and limited enforcement capacity among supervising consultants and key oversight institutions such


25
  Lee, Hyunji, Sohaib Athar, Jesper Steffensen, Roland White, and Ayah Mahgoub. 2022. Performance-Based Fiscal Transfers for Urban Local
Governments: Results and Lessons from Two Decades of World Bank Financing. World Bank, Washington, DC.


                                                                                                                                      Page 30


                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)          PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        Operation (P511300)


as MoGLSD and NEMA. In parallel. Program-Affected Persons (PAPs) often face delayed compensation, and livelihood
restoration support was inconsistently applied, undermining compliance with PforR policy and directive on adequate
management of impacts resulting from land acquisition and resettlement, including, importantly, the provision of
compensation at replacement cost to all Program affected persons, including informal occupants. These challenges
emphasize the need for stronger institutional capacity, clearer procedures, and targeted reforms to ensure that physical
infrastructure delivery does not come at the cost of noncompliance. UCMID design has strengthened the ESHS DLIs and
program action plans and has included a modest IPF project to strengthen systems to address the shortcomings identified.

54.      A hybrid PforR with IPF Project will ensure the national government has the required resources for enhancing
capacities and systems for, inter alia, environmental and social risk management as well as overall program
management. While USMID’s successes are attributed to the institutional arrangements and capacity building rendered
to LGs, the MoLHUD experienced some shortcomings in some of its deliverables, including delays in supporting the
preparation of physical development plans and SLAAC in RHDs. The ministry also fell short in its mandate to support LGs
with O&M policies. Lessons learned from using hybrid PforR and IPF project have demonstrated that national-level
activities, including technical support, policy and systems development have guaranteed funding for the Program. The IPF
project can support budget predictability for key national government actions critical to the success of the Program. The
UCMID Program has been designed as a hybrid incorporating an IPF Project with key deliverables, including necessary
improvements to ESHS risk management.

 III.     PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION

 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

55.     The UCMID will be implemented through the Government of Uganda’s existing intergovernmental structures,
building on the institutional experience of USMID program. UCMID strengthens coordination, climate integration, and
performance-based delivery, with roles distributed across national ministries, agencies, and local governments.

56.     An Opearation Steering Committee (OSC) will strategically oversight the Sustainable Urbanization and Housing
Program Working Group, including the UCMID. Chaired by the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the MoLHUD, the PSC will
include PSs from the MoLG, MoGLSD, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (MoFPED), Ministry of
Works and Transport (MoWT), Ministry of Water and Environment (MoWE), Ministry for Kampala Capital City and
Metropolitan Affairs (MoKCC&MA), and Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (MoTIC), along with Executive
Directors of the National Planning Authority (NPA) and National Environment Management Authority (NEMA).
Development partners, including the World Bank, will serve as ex-officio members. The PSC will meet at least bi-annually
or as needed to address strategic and policy matters. The OIM will include detailed terms of reference for the PSC
operations.

57.     An Operation Technical Committee (OTC), chaired by the Commissioner of MoLHUD, will serve as the core
technical coordination platform. It will include senior representatives (manager/commissioner level) from MoFPED,
MoLG, MoWT, MoGLSD, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs (MoJCA), the Public Procurement and Disposal of
Public Assets Authority (PPDA), Local Government Finance Commission (LGFC), NPA, NEMA, MoWE (Climate Change
Department), and the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), including the Departments of Monitoring and Refugees. Co-
opted members may include the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (MoEMD), National Water and Sewerage
Corporation (NWSC), MoTIC, and MoLHUD’s heads of relevant departments. The PTC will meet quarterly in different



                                                                                                                 Page 31


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
          Operation (P511300)


    regions to review work plans, performance assessments, and address implementation challenges. The OIM will include
    detailed terms of reference for the PTC operations.

50. The MoLHUD as the Chair of the SUH Program will be the Coordinating Ministry for UCMID and will serve as the lead
    implementing agency, with overall responsibility of technical leadership, fiduciary oversight, and results reporting to
    government and development partners. The day-to-day implementation will be mainstreamed within the Ministry’s
    existing departmental structure, ensuring ownership and sustainability. The operation will be anchored in the urban
    department, and a commissioner will coordinate the operation to deepen urbanization agenda. To address the immediate
    capacity gaps and ensure timely delivery of program results, MoLHUD will be supported by a lean qualified Operation
    Support Team (OST) embedded within the institution. The OST will include minimum of twelve (12) specialists in project
    management, engineering, procurement, financial management, local economic development, monitoring and evaluation
    (M&E), environmental, social, health and safety (3), climate resilience, communications/stakeholder engagement (1) and
    GIS. These professionals will work alongside their departmental counterparts and report to the commissioner for urban
    development, provide technical backstopping to Local Governments, and support the Ministry in fulfilling its coordination
    and oversight functions. The OST’s role will be transitional, with its functions gradually absorbed by MoLHUD staff as
    institutional capacity is strengthened through training, mentoring, and staffing adjustments. The OST will be provided with
    annual performance contracts.

    58.     MoLHUD will lead policy and regulatory reforms to modernize Uganda’s urban planning and development
    framework. This includes reviewing and updating physical planning laws, regulations, and technical standards to
    incorporate climate resilience, low-carbon development, and inclusive spatial planning approaches. MoLHUD will provide
    oversight during the implementation of the Physical Planning Act, ensuring that national and local physical development
    plans reflect UCMID priorities and resilience goals. MoLHUD will take lead in strengthening land administration and
    development control, including improving development permitting and enforcement workflows, supporting fit-for-
    purpose parcel and right-of-way verification processes, building local capacity for land governance, updating and digitizing
    basic land records and base maps. Furthermore, in partnership with the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBoS) and the
    National Planning Authority (NPA), MoLHUD will spearhead the creation of a national urban data platform, equipped with
    Geographic Information System (GIS) and remote sensing capabilities. This platform will enable evidence-based planning,
    real-time monitoring of urban growth and infrastructure development, and better alignment of investment decisions with
    climate and development objectives. The MoLHUD will sign Performance Service Agreements with the MDAs to provide
    their oversight and mandates.

    59.     Ministry of Local Government (MoLG) will deploy Town Clerks and Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) as
    Accounting Officers in participating local governments and ensure they sign performance contracts with the PS/ST of
    MoFPED. In coordination with the Ministry of Public Service, MoLG will support LG staffing and lead capacity building in
    governance, local economic development (LED), and accountability. They will also ensure conducive policies are in place
    and support LGs in OSR enhancement. They will coordinate the development of standardized guidelines for procurement,
    contract management, and operations and maintenance.

    60.    Program Local Governments (LGs) will be the implementing entities. Cities, municipalities, and districts hosting
    refugees are the local governments responsible for planning, budgeting, procurement, implementation, and reporting of
    UCMID activities. Town Clerks and Chief Administrative Officers will be supported by core technical staff (engineers,
    planners, treasurers, procurement and environmental officers, and community development staff), working through




                                                                                                                        Page 32


                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                          PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       Operation (P511300)


Technical Planning Committees and Cities and Municipal Development Forums 26. LGs will also implement local revenue
enhancement and climate adaptation measures. Recognizing the importance of inclusive governance, the Program will
use the current composition of MDFs as a baseline to strengthen women’s participation in decision-making processes at
the local level. Efforts will be made to increase female representation and voice in these forums, aligning with the
Program’s broader inclusion agenda.


61.     Anti-Corruption and Parliamentary Oversight will be led by the Inspectorate of Government (IG), Directorate of
Criminal Investigation (CID), and Directorate of Public Prosecution (DPP), with administrative action by MoLHUD and LGs.
Oversight will be provided by the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) and the Parliamentary Committee on Public Service
and Local Government, with the Minister of MoLHUD accountable for UCMID delivery.

62.     The World Bank task team will be responsible for: (a) Reviewing implementation progress and achievement of
Program results and DLIs; (b) providing support for implementation issues as well as institutional capacity building; (c)
monitoring systems performance to ensure their continuing adequacy through Program monitoring reports, audit reports,
as well as field visits; and (d) monitoring changes in risks to the Program and compliance with legal agreements and, as
needed, the Program Action Plan.

B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements

63.      The Program will be monitored and reported throughout implementation using existing government systems
at various levels. These systems already have comprehensive M&E tools, including regular reports from city, municipal,
and district local government (LGs) levels. Monitoring will be further strengthened by Annual Performance Assessments
(APAs), inputs from PPDA Annual Procurement Audits, Office of Auditor General Value for Money Audits, midterm review,
and regular progress reviews.

64.      Program M&E capacity will be enhanced. At the national level, OST will be put in place and shall include an M&E
specialist responsible for supporting LGs in ensuring data quality and linking annual performance assessment results to
institutional development and capacity-building activities. At the municipal and district LG levels, M&E capacity will be
strengthened by training staff in engineering, planning, finance, and procurement, as identified through annual
institutional strengthening plans and capacity needs assessments. This will enable timely compilation of progress reports
for effective monitoring of Program activities. The Program will use the Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring and
Supervision (GEMS) tool to collect field data in a centralized GIS platform, supplemented by additional GIS tools to be
developed by the Program.

65.      The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MoLHUD), as the coordinating ministry, will submit
annual Program progress reports to the World Bank within three (03) months of the start of each fiscal year. Reports
will also be shared with the PTC for discussion and guidance. A midterm review will be conducted within 30 months of the
financing agreement’s effectiveness to evaluate progress and recommend adjustments to the Program design if needed.

C. Disbursement Arrangements


26 The lesson learned from USMID was that the District Development Forums (DDFs) did not work well like the MDF because the projects were very

dispersed and movement of DDF members was constrained. Under UCMID the Town Development Forums (TDFs) will be set up in each urban area
implementing the urban infrastructure.


                                                                                                                                      Page 33


                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)            PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       Operation (P511300)


66.      PforR Program: Disbursements under the Program are subject to PforR procedures and disbursed against APA
results achieved for each DLI. Upon confirmation of the achievement of Program Disbursement-Linked Results, the Bank
will disburse the corresponding amount to the MoFPED in one tranche on a yearly basis. Funds for DLIs 1-8 are for the
City, Municipal and District Local Governments and disbursements will be made from MoFPED to these implementing
entities or Program local governments on a quarterly basis. DLIs 9 and 10 are for the national level entities and transfers
will be based on the APA results achieved for each DLI. Funds will be disbursed in one tranche to the MoFPED. A detailed
explanation of the steps needed for disbursement against each Program DLI will be incorporated in the OIM.

67.     IPF Project: Disbursement arrangements will be based on procedures that are consistent with IPF modalities.
The funds will be disbursed from IDA to MoFPED and then to the Coordinating Ministry (MoLHUD) based on agreed
modalities (as detailed in the OIM).

 IV.     PROGRAM ASSESSMENTS SUMMARY

 A. Technical

68.    The Technical Assessment (TA) has been undertaken based on existing GoU’s strategies and WB’s studies on
urban development in Uganda, experiences from the previous programs (USMID, UGIFT and GKMA), dialog with several
government partners, annual performance assessments (APAs), and a comprehensive baseline data set collected from 47
LGs on municipal finance, local services delivery, physical planning and investment capacities. All this permitted a
comprehensive assessment of the program’s relevance and technical quality including the program’s expenditure
framework. The following paragraphs in this section summarize key findings of the Technical Assessment that inform the
Program design.

69.     The Program has a strong strategic relevance. The Program is aligned with GoU Vision 2040 where the
Government pledges to invest in better urban systems that enhance productivity, livability and sustainability to achieve
faster socio-economic transformation. The urban areas will be centres of industrial development, financial, trade,
education and other services that will foster economic productivity. The Program is consistent with the National
Development Plan IV (NDPIV) with the main objectives being to: (i) develop and maintain urban infrastructure in line with
physical development plans; (ii) develop appropriate drainage and waste management systems; (iv) increase economic
opportunities in urban areas; and (v) strengthen the policy, legal, institutional and coordination frameworks. The Program
supports the Government National Urban Policy, which has the cities/urban centres as drivers of change for development
and the goal to promote livable urban areas that are organized, inclusive, productive and sustainable. The Program is in
line with the decentralization agenda as it will promote more effective and sustainable decentralization in Uganda by
enabling urban local governments (LGs) improve capacity in urban governance for service delivery. The Program will also
support the upcoming Refugee Policy – especially its focus on the needs of urban refugees and mitigating the impacts of
hosting for both host communities and host urban local governments. The Program addresses the key urbanization
challenges faced by urban areas as outlined in the different government policies and strategic plans and confirmed from
the various analytical reports and stakeholder consultations including the survey conducted as part of the Technical
Assessment.

70.      The Program is consistent with the draft Country Partnership Framework (CPF) between the GoU and World
Bank for the period 2026–2035. The CPF emphasizes expanding access to quality infrastructure, strengthening human
capital, and advancing structural reforms to promote private-sector-driven, climate-resilient growth for sustained
transformation and job creation. UCMID supports at least three key CPF outcomes: (i) improving connectivity and fostering


                                                                                                                   Page 34


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)            PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


an energy-enabled economy, aiming to benefit 20 million people through better, sustainable transport infrastructure and
services by 2035, which will boost employment, connect markets, enhance productivity, lower business costs, and provide
direct jobs in construction and maintenance; (ii) advancing a more productive private sector by strengthening the business
environment; and (iii) ensuring sustainable and resilient management of natural resources by protecting biodiversity,
promoting community-led conservation, investing in nature-based tourism, and integrating resource management into
national development planning. Additionally, UCMID aligns with the cross-cutting outcome which supports stronger
inclusion and economic governance by enhancing resilience and improving public sector performance and accountability
for inclusive growth and equitable service delivery.

71.     The Government has demonstrated commitment to using the PforR funding instrument based on the successes
registered on the previous USMID, current UGIFT and GKMA, which have been implemented over the last ten years.

Technical Soundness

72.     The proposed design is considered technically sound. An analysis has been undertaken on the existing constraints
of participating entities at both the national and LG levels. The previous support notwithstanding, the LGs still have
deficiencies in the overall physical and development planning frameworks; meagre own source revenue collection;
procurement and contract management; accounting and core financial management; project implementation/execution;
environmental and social safeguards; as well as staffing and human resource management. The LGs have inadequate and
poorly planned infrastructure and experience adverse climate change impacts. The weak institutional capacity (technical
and financial) for integrated and sustainable urban planning hampers urban development and limits economic
opportunities. This is especially the case in the urban areas in the RHDs where both the host populations and refugees
struggle to access economic and social services. Similarly, most of the MDAs have neither adequate in-house capacity nor
resources to perform their respective mandates.

73.       The Program design incorporates clear strategies and targeted interventions to address the identified urban
challenges. The design of the Program is based on tested approaches and lessons learnt from similar PforR programs as
well as performance-based grants in Uganda and internationally. The design has provided for institutional strengthening
of both LGs and relevant MDAs knowing that program results are co-produced. The proposed model which has proved
effective in previous Programs provides for institutional strengthening grants to participating LGs to implement demand-
driven capacity building activities and complemented with supply-driven institutional strengthening by MDAs. The design
is based on allocation of resources to the Program entities based on achievement of Disbursement Linked Results. The
performance incentive structure, under the disbursement-linked indicators, encourages effective service delivery,
enhances resilient infrastructure, and, at the same time, supports institutional capacity enhancement. The proposed
investment menu promotes green, low-carbon and climate-resilient investments focusing on urban transport
infrastructure, urban drainage systems, green infrastructure, and economic opportunities and job creation. A dedicated
window has been provided for refugee hosting districts to strengthen social cohesion, promote peaceful co-existence
among host communities and refugees, and to improve local livelihoods. Based on lessons learnt, an IPF Project has been
introduced to improve the efficiency of Program management, capacity building and technical support to LGs; capacity
building for MDAs and conducting of policy and analytical work to improve the local government and MDA environment.
Finally, targeted LGUs have also benefited from USMID’s support in quickly identifying, designing and implementing
eligible investments; thus, improving their absorptive capacity.

74.    The Program design draws on lessons learned from the previous programs to strengthen oversight
arrangements to make them more effective. The design has proposed a smaller Operation Steering Committee (OSC)


                                                                                                                  Page 35


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                     PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       Operation (P511300)


chaired by the Permanent Secretary of MoLHUD and composed of PSs from MoLG, MoWT, MoFPED and Directors from
NPA, PPDA, and NEMA to ensure that it effectively discusses policy issues affecting the implementation of UCMID. The
design has broadened the membership of the Operation Technical Committee (OTC) drawn from the MDAs at the national
level with mandates at the decentralized local governments so that it plays a key role in providing the local governments
with the necessary technical standards and guidance. The OTC will also ensure that the technical standards of the
subprojects implemented are acceptable. Supervision by the central ministries will provide the necessary assurance of the
technical quality of the various activities to be implemented under the Program.

75.      The proposed design and activities to be implemented under the UCMID Program will contribute to the
realization of results and achievement of the development objective. The types of activities to be implemented using
the Program funds: (i) at national and subnational levels and (ii) using a hybrid of PforR and IPF resources, will result in
improved quality of core municipal services and strengthen the capacities of the Central Government Ministries (MoLHUD,
MoLG, NPA) as well as participating cities, municipalities and districts hosting refugees.

76.     Paris Alignment and Climate Change Co-benefit. UCMID is designed to be fully consistent with the Paris
Agreement and Uganda’s updated Nationally Determined Contribution 27 (NDC), which commits to a 24.7 percent
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030. The Program directly contributes to Uganda’s National Climate Change
Act (2021) and the Uganda Green Growth Development Strategy (2017–2031) 28 by integrating mitigation and adaptation
into urban infrastructure and governance systems. At least 60 percent of program-financed investments will deliver
climate co-benefits, in line with the World Bank’s climate accounting methodology. The contributions will be explicit and
measurable. Key risks to achieving Paris alignment and credible climate co-benefits include: (i) limited capacity to screen,
design, implement, and maintain climate-smart investments; (ii) data and documentation gaps affecting climate-risk
screening and climate co-benefit accounting; and (iii) weak O&M and asset management that can erode benefits over
time. To mitigate these risks, UCMID applies climate-risk screening and resilient/low-carbon design requirements to
investment preparation, strengthens implementation oversight and targeted capacity building for LGs/MDAs, and embeds
the requirement of climate risk screening and O&M into the respective DLIs.

77.      Adaptation co-benefits: Investments in primary and secondary drainage, flood protection, and nature-based
solutions will reduce vulnerability to extreme rainfall, flooding, and landslides. Urban greening, wetland restoration, and
climate-resilient designs will enhance urban ecosystems, reduce heat stress, and protect water resources, contributing
directly to Uganda’s NDC adaptation targets.

78.       Mitigation co-benefits: The Program will promote low-carbon urbanization through non-motorized transport
corridors, solar-powered streetlighting, energy-efficient urban infrastructure, and piloting of electric vehicle (EV) charging
facilities. Investments in sustainable solid waste management, segregation, composting, and recycling will reduce
methane emissions, supporting Uganda’s emission reduction commitments.

79.     Institutional and systemic contributions: The UCMID will build the capacity of local governments and central
ministries to integrate climate screening, disaster risk information, and low-carbon planning into investment decisions,
ensuring durable mainstreaming of climate action in Uganda’s urban sector.


27
   Uganda’s updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC 2022): https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-
09/Updated%20NDC%20_Uganda_2022%20Final.pdf
28
   The Uganda Green Growth Development Strategy 2017/18 – 2030/31: https://gggi.org/site/assets/uploads/2019/03/Uganda-Green-Growth-
Development-Strategy-20171204.pdf


                                                                                                                               Page 36


                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                            PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       Operation (P511300)


80.     The Program will promote gender equality and inclusion by creating permanent jobs for women in urban
operations and services. According to the gender gap analysis undertaken by government in 2019 and 2023, women are
under-represented in municipal leadership positions, decision making roles and labor force, including senior and middle
level employment, approximately 25% of jobs in the medium and small urban local governments are held by women,
including jobs in infrastructure, services and LED facilities. These gaps are underpinned by a lack of dedicated skills
development opportunities and conducive work environments for women. Moreover, only 27% of C/MDF members are
women, leading to urban planning and investment prioritization that is poorly suited to facilitating women’s mobility and
access to job opportunities.

81.      The Operation is committed to ensuring that 40 percent of permanent jobs (totaling 8,000) generated through
urban infrastructure, services and LED facilities 29 are allocated to women. Under Pillar 5 of the Investment Menu, the
Program will prioritize investments in safe, accessible, and mobility-enhancing urban infrastructure—including pedestrian
walkways, bus terminals, street lighting, gender-segregated restrooms, childcare facilities, dedicated market stalls, public
safety measures, and improved job access. Women's leadership and participation in C/MDFs will be actively promoted to
ensure infrastructure is designed, constructed, and operated with consideration for women's safety, accessibility, and
labor market requirements. At least 30 percent of C/MDF members will be women, with each forum having at least one
woman in a leadership or executive role, either as chairperson or vice chairperson. Pillar 5 will also prioritize investments
in skills development initiatives to bolster women's preparedness for salaried employment and entrepreneurship,
including technical, vocational, education and training (TVET) centers and incubation hubs. Additionally, UDG provisions
under Windows 2 and 3 will incentivize local governments to pursue planning and investment activities that generate
permanent employment opportunities for women. Minimum access criteria for grants require urban local governments
to implement a job creation and skills development plan, reserving at least 40 percent of employment and training
opportunities for women, including those from refugee and host communities. Furthermore, municipal governments
seeking urban grants must demonstrate their capacity to monitor labor market outcomes for female beneficiaries of urban
infrastructure and services and adopt strategies fostering conducive work environments for women within their offices
and operations. Under DLIs 4 and 7, urban local governments will be incentivized to ensure that 30-40 percent of
individuals benefiting from jobs in improved markets are women. Finally, through the IPF component, urban local
governments will receive technical support to develop gender-inclusive investments, conduct gender-responsive planning,
and promote safer work environments.

82.     Gender-related actions during implementation will be tracked using one outcome indicator: (i) people in urban
areas provided with more and better jobs (number) disaggregated by gender (number) and by host and refugee
populations (number) as measured by the achievement of targets set under DLIs 4&7 and verified during the APA by an
IVA, and one intermediate outcome indicator: (ii) permanent jobs created for women through urban infrastructure,
services, and LED facilities (target: 8,000).

83.     Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) and Private Sector Participation. The program leverages the World
Bank’s MFD approach to mobilize private capital alongside public resources for urban resilience and service delivery. It
will promote public-private partnerships (PPPs) in solid waste reduction, recycling, and composting, while supporting local
economic hubs and innovation centers that can crowd in small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and private investments.
In addition, the program will pilot PPP solutions for smart parking and electric vehicle (EV) charging systems and
strengthen the financial management capacity of Local Governments to gradually build their creditworthiness for

29A wide range of jobs are envisioned under the project, including medium and high-skilled employment, in addition to wage and self-employment,

which cannot be exhaustively outlined at this stage. During implementation, each municipal government will be required to develop job creation and
skills development plans outlining the types of jobs being created in infrastructure, services and LED facilities.


                                                                                                                                         Page 37


                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)             PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


accessing future private finance. The IPF project will play a critical role in strengthening the capacity of government
agencies, implementing entities and private sector entities to enhance their ability to develop and implement PPP projects.
This includes developing model PPP contracts and standard operating guidelines for municipalities, supporting transaction
advisory services, and conducting pre-feasibility and market sounding studies to de-risk investments for private partners.
The IPF will also provide technical support to Local Governments to prepare bankable sub-projects, establish transparent
procurement and contract management systems, and integrate climate-risk assessments into PPP designs.

84.      Community and Stakeholders Engagements. The UCMID will continue adopting the participatory and inclusive
approach to ensure that citizens, local governments, and stakeholders meaningfully shape program priorities and monitor
results. Building on lessons from USMID and GKMA UDP, Municipal Development Forums (MDFs) will continue to serve as
institutionalized citizen platforms that bring together civil society, private sector, academia, community leaders, and, in
refugee-hosting areas, representatives of both host and refugee communities. Participating Local Governments will carry
out structured consultations during sub-project design and disclose information in accessible formats, with particular
attention to women, youth, and vulnerable groups. The IPF project will support the development and roll out of a robust
Stakeholder and Communications Strategy for the Program.

85.      Accountability will be reinforced through functional grievance redress mechanisms (GRMs) at all Local
Governments, integrated with national systems and through citizen monitoring and social audits feeding into the Annual
Performance Assessment (APA). These mechanisms will improve transparency, resolve complaints in a timely manner,
and strengthen trust between government and citizens. Inclusive planning and joint investments in refugee-hosting
districts will further promote social cohesion and peaceful coexistence, while beneficiary feedback surveys and APA
indicators will track satisfaction, gender participation, and grievance resolution.

Result Framework & M&E

86.     The PDO is to enhance the institutional performance of selected urban local governments and ministries for urban
planning and management and improve access to climate smart infrastructure, services and jobs for urban residents and
displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas.

87.      The results framework will include both the PDO indicators and the intermediate results indicators. The PDO
indicators will be measured by: (i) enhanced institutional capacity of city, municipal and national institutions for urban
management (percentage), as measured from the performance achievement of the respective DLIs 1, 2 and 7 for LGs and
DLIs 9-10 for MDAs, (ii) people in urban areas provided with improved living conditions through access to climate smart
infrastructure and services disaggregated by gender (percentage), by host and refugee populations (percentage) as
measured through the achievement of targets set under DLIs 3, 5 and 7, (iii) people in urban areas provided with more
and better jobs (number) disaggregated by gender (percentage) and by host and refugee populations (percentage) as
measured by the achievement of targets set under DLIs 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8.

88.     The intermediate outcomes will be measured at different Program areas which will include the following:
a)      Intermediate RA1 - enhanced local and national level institutional capacity and performance for sustainable urban
management: (i) systems, strategies, and integrated tools developed and implemented for improved MDAs performance,
(ii) integrated planning tools and urban management systems in selected thematic areas (procurement, accounting,
budgeting, and financial management, planning, own source revenue collection, climate change mitigation and adaptation
measures, land use management, and ESHS risk management) developed and implemented for urban local governments,
(iii) number of staff provided with relevant skills, (iv) local governments able to fund at least 10% of their budgets from

                                                                                                                   Page 38


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


own source revenues (number), and (v) local Governments that have successfully established and executed O&M systems
for all major urban infrastructure assets to ensure sustainability of investments (number).
b)     Intermediate RA2 - improved access to sustainable urban infrastructure, services and local economic opportunities:
(i) Climate smart infrastructure strategy, and innovative data-driven digital solutions adopted, contributing to value for
money, (ii) sustainable infrastructure and services delivered, (iii), local economic infrastructure completed, (iv) number of
jobs created, and (iv) stakeholder satisfaction in the level of services delivered.
c)     Intermediate RA3 - improved livelihoods and local economic opportunities for the host communities and refugees:
(i) physical development plans implemented, (ii) local climate-smart infrastructure completed, (iii) number of jobs created,
and (iv) refugees and host community members satisfied with services provided.

89.     Capacity Building for Monitoring and Evaluation. The Program will be monitored and evaluated by use of several
M&E tools throughout implementation, including regular reports from cities, municipal and district LGs, the Annual
Performance Assessments, (including inputs from PPDA Annual Procurement Audits and the Office of Auditor General
Value for the Money Audit), annual audit reports, Midterm Review and regular reviews. The Program M&E capacity at the
city, municipal and district LG levels will be enhanced through training of the staff in engineering, planning, finance and
procurement identified through the annual institutional strengthening plans and capacity needs assessments so that they
are able to compile timely progress reports for monitoring the implementation progress of the various activities under the
Program. Lessons from the previous USMID Program will be utilized to enhance the M&E function.

90.     PBS will be the main reporting tool for financial and physical progress reporting. There will be quarterly and bi-
annual reports each year to MoLHUD, as laid out in the OIM, Annual Program Assessments, procurement and value for
the money audits. Further work will be done to align the PBS and OIM indicators. Further dialogue will be undertaken
between MoFPED and MLHUD during the development of the OIM to ensure that PBS covers the basis and needs for
reporting to avoid parallel systems and ensure consistent flow of information, supplemented by formats in the OIM.

91.    A Mid Term Review will be conducted midway through the program implementation to review Program
performance and any need for adjustments, options for up-scaling and realignment, especially of the APA system of
minimum conditions and performance measures.

92.     The major M&E tool to verify the performance of the MLGs is the Annual Performance Assessment (APA). The
APA will be synchronized with the annual planning and budgeting process and completed by the end of January each year
(with some delays expected in year one. The APA will be carried out by an independent firm to ensure the objectivity of
the process. The Annual Performance Assessments will include the results of the other annual audits conducted by the
Office of Auditor General and the Value-for-Money Audits by OAG as well as the procurement audits by PPDA. These will
also be important tools in tracking institutional and infrastructure performance improvements. The assessment will be
carried out in line with the OIM and the Performance Assessment Tool. It will be closely aligned with the GoU national
system and procedures for Annual Performance Assessment of LGs, which has a robust system of assessment and QA
based on the lessons learnt from USMID and other systems.

93.     The verification protocols put in place ensure that the content and quality of the APA is acceptable to the Bank.
The Bank will provide technical input to the terms of reference for IVA procurement, and the government will undertake
the procurement through a competitive process and shall provide the IVA with a multiyear contract to avoid delays in the
mobilization of teams. The Bank will undertake a Quality Assurance Review (QAR) of the IVA reports. The UCMID OIM will
elaborate on the Performance Assessment Tool (PAT) including definition of each indicator as well as guidance on


                                                                                                                     Page 39


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                          PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       Operation (P511300)


performance measures, the scoring, and information sources. The PAT will be developed as an addendum to the Local
Government Performance Assessment Manual, issued by OPM. Adjustments, which might be needed to the performance
indicators and scoring, will be done throughout implementation and particularly at the mid-term review to address any
possible shortcomings or changes in GoU program monitoring or on the ground.

94.      The Program will enhance M&E capacity at both the national and local government levels to ensure that core
staff are able to fulfil the requirements. The M&E specialist under the OST will continue to provide support to MLHUD in
strengthening its own capacity as well as the capacity to support the urban local governments. Capacity building and
training will include the development of standard and digital M&E systems. Capacity building at the MoLHUD will improve
the alignment of the OIM with indicators and monitoring systems for the Government program on which the PBS is based.

Expenditure Framework Adequacy

95.     Assessment of the expenditure framework adequacy. The government has a well-developed LG grant structure.
Once the Program resources are reflected in the external resource envelope, the Sustainable Urbanization and Housing
Program will be activated in the transfers to LGs captured on the Online Transfer Information Management System
(OTIMS). Funding of Government program is reflected in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). Government
of Uganda has robust systems to track and report on Government expenditures under the Program. The GoU has a well-
developed budget classification system to track government expenditures under the Program using the Program
Budgeting System (PBS). The PBS, together with the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) will
streamline the Program reporting. All participating cities, municipalities, and district LGs will be required to use the
Integrated Financial Management System (IFMIS). There is value added by the PforR Program resources, especially
regarding green, low-carbon and climate-resilient elements. UCMID PforR being 25% of SUH reflects Government
commitment, ownership and a likelihood to sustain the Program.

96.      Economic Justification and Financial Sustainability. Economic analysis of previous programs and investments in
Uganda and the East Africa region indicate that the economic impact of urban infrastructure and accompanying
investments is positive, with a high average economic internal rate of return average of 27.5- 33 % for urban roads, 10.6
percent for drainage and 27percent for street lighting 30. The EIRR for the UCMID Program yielded values ranging from 13-
29 percent, which was greater than the 12 % discount rate used. The cost benefit ratios (BCR) were also greater than 1.
The program is also expected to have other non-quantifiable benefits, including resilience to climate change, improved
road safety, security and reduction in crime, environmental sustainability and enhanced quality of life. Urban
infrastructure projects, such as the construction and rehabilitation of roads, drainage, waste management systems, green
spaces, and public buildings, have a multiplier effect on job creation. The Program will enhance urban local governments
revenue generation to address the challenges of financial sustainability.

B. Fiduciary

97.     For the PforR program, an integrated Fiduciary System Assessment (FSA) has been prepared according to the
World Bank’s policy and directive. The main implementing entities, MoLHUD, selected cities, municipalities and districts
have been assessed and found to have the capacity as well as adequate procurement and financial management systems
to provide reasonable assurance that the Program funds will be used for intended purposes with due attention to the


30
  World Bank, 2012. Technical Assessment Report for Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) Program as a Program-for-
Results (PforR) Operation


                                                                                                                                      Page 40


                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and accountability. A standalone FSA report has been
prepared.

98.     Fiduciary risk is rated substantial. Main fiduciary risks include: (i) budget and planning challenges such as lack of
multi-year planning, delayed revoting of unused LG resources, low budget utilization and incomprehensive procurement
planning; (ii) delayed release of funds to implementing entities and sweeping back of fund at year end; (iii) account
recording irregularities and delayed reporting from LGs on use of resources; (iv) internal control weaknesses identified
both on internal and external audit reports and delayed actions on these; (v) understaffing of the internal audit unit at the
LGs and inadequate internal audit review; (vi) fraud and corruption oversight is weakened by limited consolidated
reporting which delays investigations and adequate tracking of remedial actions thereby increasing fiduciary risk; (vii)
procurement delay and non-compliance with procurement policies; and (viii) contract management challenges resulting
in delayed payments, stalled work, incurred penalties, and contract non-compliance.

99.      Fiduciary risks are mitigated by the design of the Program. The identified risks are to be mitigated as follows: (a)
the minimum access conditions for DLI 2 address the gaps of planning and budgeting, delayed reporting, understaffing
and addressing audit findings on time with requirements such as: submission of annual performance contracts which
encompass work plans, budgets and procurement details; employing certified chief finance officers and internal audits;
providing financial performance reports for the previous fiscal year and ensuring the external audit opinion is not adverse
or a disclaimer; (b) monitoring timely release of resources through implementation support and early revoting of unused
resources; (c) conducting at least annual internal audit review; (d) the development of a financial resource management
tool to monitor fund flows and contract status across multi-year projects; (e) subjecting all contracts to Open Competitive
Bidding pursuant to the PPDA Act; and (f) capacity building for MLHUD/LGs on financial management, procurement and
contract management. Semiannual fraud and corruption reporting will be mandated within the financing agreement,
while semiannual financial reporting will be stipulated in the disbursement and financial information letter (DFIL). The
OIM will lay out internal control procedures for financial management and procurement.

100.     The operation is subject to the World Bank Anti-Corruption Guidelines (ACG). The operation will benefit from an
MoU with the Inspectorate of Government (currently under update) that has supported reporting and investigation of
fraud and corruption (F&C) cases alongside the Bank Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) office. Further, to address the F&C
risks associated with fiduciary and other implementation risks, the PforR implementation will be aligned with the ACG
applicable to PforR operations, Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Program-for-Results
financing (July 2016) as documented in this report.

101.     Exclusion of high-value contracts. High-value contracts involving procurement of goods, works, and non-
consulting and consulting services whose estimated values exceed the applicable Operational Procurement Review
Committee (OPRC) thresholds set out in the World Bank’s Procurement Procedure are not within the Program boundaries
and are excluded from the Program. The FM assessment of the IPF project was conducted according to the World Bank’s
IPF policy, with MoLHUD as the implementing entity. The FM arrangements currently in place in MoLHUD for managing
World Bank-financed operations were found acceptable to provide reasonable assurance on the use of the borrowed
resources.

102.    Procurement. The hybrid operation combines the PforR Program and IPF project. Under the PforR Program, the
selected Local Governments will apply the National Public procurement procedures laid out in the Public Procurement
and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) Act CAP. 205 and attaining PPDA Regulations dated 2023. For IPF Project, MoLHUD
will procure activities in line with the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers (September 2025).


                                                                                                                     Page 41


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


Procurement capacity assessments were conducted for MoLHUD and sampled LGs. The risk rating is Substantial for
MoLHUD and High for LGs. While USMID’s performance was assessed as satisfactory, MoLHUD has faced procurement
challenges under other Bank-financed projects such as CEDP. Nevertheless, MoLHUD has adequate capacity to coordinate
the program and manage IPF procurement. Capacity will be further supported through training, technical support
(including ToR preparation and bid evaluation), and provision of standard templates and good practice examples.

103.    The overall procurement risk of the operation is assessed as Substantial. At the MLHUD level, risks include delays
in procurement processing, inadequate staffing and contract management deficiencies and delays. At the level of the local
governments, weaknesses include: (a) poor record keeping and filing systems, (b) lack of data upload on the Government
procurement portal (GPP), (c) lack of information and disclosure of procurement activities, (d) insufficient sensitization of
stakeholders on negative impacts of corruption in public procurement, and (e) lack of regular procurement audits, limited
adherence to the evaluation criteria, limited knowledge on complaint handling, relatively low procurement expenditure
in the past, and limited experience in high value operations. Measures to mitigate procurement-related risks at MLHUD
and local government levels include appropriate staffing requirements, limiting procurement packages at the local
government’s levels, the delivery of training activities, the provision of standard templates and guidance, and the use of
performance-based incentives.

104.      The FSA confirmed that the program will not include contracts exceeding the World Bank’s Operational
Procurement Review Committee (OPRC) thresholds. Reservation and Preferences schemes will not apply under the
project however for the IPF project a new requirement for local labour participation will be applied to all works contracts
subject to international competitive procurement that are required to use the Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents
(SPDs) and advertised on or after September 1, 2025. For such procurement, Borrowers will require that bidders allocate
not less than 30% of the total labour cost under the contract to the engagement of local staff and personnel (local labour)
and Firms and Individuals debarred or suspended by the World Bank shall not be eligible to participate or be awarded
contracts under the PforR.

 C. Environmental and Social

105.    The Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) for the UCMID Program was undertaken in alignment
with the World Bank's Policy and Directive for Program-for-Results Financing and building on lessons learned from the
ESSAs for USMID and GKMA UDP. Based on the ESSA, the E&S risk rating of the Program is assessed to be Substantial
because of the types of infrastructure investments under the Program, their locations in urban areas and capacity
weaknesses to implement ESHS risk management measures. The ESSA confirmed the presence of an Environmental Social
Health and Safety (ESHS) system to assess and manage risks and impacts of the Program. Uganda has laws that address,
inclusion, and accountability issues, and has adequate legal and institutional frameworks for managing ESHS risks.
However, challenges exist in the implementation and enforcement of such laws and the functioning of the ESHS system
and institutional capacity overall.

106.      The ESSA has identified significant gaps including delays in the ESIA review and approval process by NEMA,
insufficient monitoring and poor enforcement of ESHS measures resulting in multiple incidents (including fatalities)
involving both workers and community members, a persistent need for capacity building within local governments,
difficulties with waste management, capacity limitations in terms of personnel, equipment and budgetary allocations,
especially at local levels. Lack of early and sustained stakeholder engagement, inadequate compensation for project-
affected persons (PAPs), challenges with stakeholder engagement, including grievance management, and limited capacity
among contractors and consultants to effectively address, implement and enforce ESHS were also noted.


                                                                                                                     Page 42


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)               PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)




107.     Measures to address the identified gaps include: (a) support to the Occupational Safety and Health (OSH)
Department and the Labor Department under the MoGLSD to help build its oversight systems, capacity and instituting a
certification program for OHS professionals in Uganda; (b) TA to align land acquisition processes & requirements with
World Bank PforR principles on Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement such as providing in all cases of land and
asset acquisition under the Program for fair compensation and restoring livelihoods for PAPs (including informal
occupants) affected by the Program; (c) aligning labor requirements with World Bank’s core principle of public and workers
safety; and, (d) strengthening GRMs by enforcing implementation, improving documentation with MoGLSD (as oversight
agency), integrating project-level GRMs with the national system, and automating grievance management systems.

108.     The E&S risk for the IPF project is Substantial. For the IPF project which will directly support the achievement of
the PforR results by financing upstream activities that enable effective implementation and results delivery under the
PforR, the relevant Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) for the IPF funded activities include ESS1-6, ESS8 and ESS10.
The environmental risk rating is Substantial. Although the IPF activities are primarily upstream, with direct Environmental
risks largely benign and associated with the procurement and use of IT equipment (e.g., generation of e-waste), energy
consumption, OHS risks (e.g. related to travel, workshops, fieldwork), outputs of the detailed design packages will
influence infrastructure investments under the PforR component, which may carry significant environmental risks
including inherent environment health and safety risks associated with civil works (OHS and community health and safety
[CHS], waste generation, impacts on urban ecosystems, vegetation clearance, air, noise and water pollution etc.). if not
properly managed. If environmental considerations are not adequately integrated into these designs, downstream risks
could be amplified.

109.     The IPF’s social risk rating is Substantial. Although activities supported under the IPF project are expected to
generate benefits as result of capacity building and improved policies/systems and enhanced urban management, if
inadequately implemented, there could be risks related to stakeholder engagement, social inclusion (e.g., exclusion of
vulnerable groups in policy development), and inadequate, delayed, or non-payment of compensation for land acquisition.
Risks of discrimination and exclusion may be exacerbated in the context of the Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2023 and require
enhanced implementation support and monitoring. Furthermore, new policies, plans, systems and detailed designs that
are being supported under this IPF project will inform future investments and, if not properly incorporating fully relevant
ESS requirements in such technical support (in terms of reference and the technical support provided), may lead to indirect
and downstream social impacts and risks. MoLHUD’s has previous experience with World Bank-financed projects such as
USMID, CEDP, and ARSDP, but significant challenges have persisted particularly regarding capacity to implement land
acquisition and resettlement, OHS and grievance management and stakeholder engagement, and the IPF will provide
support in this regard to enhance ESHS systems and capacities. The presence of refugee populations in several targeted
municipalities introduces further vulnerability, heightening the risk of exclusion from project benefits. Robust grievance
mechanisms (GMs) are essential for resolving stakeholder or worker grievances and facilitating meaningful engagement.
The GMs to be implemented must be well suited to address issues relating to SEA/SH both within the context of
institutions and entities involved as well as in communities where the project will interface. Issues relating to recruitment,
working conditions and OHS may arise, and therefore implementation of a worker GM (for program staff and consultants)
will be essential.

110.    ESF instruments prepared for the operation include specific measures to mitigate the risk of discrimination
against or exclusion of any affected individuals or groups in providing or receiving benefits under the Program. These
measures are described in detail in the prepared ESCP for the IPF and the ESSA report, as well as any ToR that will duly
incorporate relevant Bank ES requirements. The Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS) was


                                                                                                                      Page 43


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


completed and disclosed in September 2025. The appraisal-stage ESCP, SEP, and ESSA underwent stakeholder consultation
on October 6, 2025, and were subsequently disclosed in November 2025. Final versions of the ESCP, SEP, and ESSA will be
made available following the conclusion of negotiations. The following are examples of the mitigation measures included
in all the aforementioned documents: (a) strengthening the capacity of the Project Implementing Teams, workers,
contractors, subcontractors, and service providers, which shall include worker training and sensitization on the obligations
of project participants to ensure non-discrimination of individual or groups who are vulnerable or marginalized; (b)
ensuring that contracts, codes of conduct, hiring procedures, whistle-blower protection protocols, and other measures,
as needed, are in place to allow remediation of cases of discrimination; (c) designing and implementing a mechanism to
receive and report grievances to the World Bank, proposing appropriate remediation, and following up on agreed actions
to resolve cases of discrimination reported through a dedicated hotline; and (d) developing a strong data management
system and process that secures personal data and information in a manner that is safe, ethical, and confidential.

111.    Furthermore, the ESSA reference GoU’s Circular on Uganda’s Social Safeguard Policies, issued on September 21,
2023, by MoFPED. The circular states the following: (a) all World Bank-financed projects in Uganda must be implemented
in a manner consistent with the principles of non-discrimination, as provided under Article 21 of the Constitution of the
Republic of Uganda. These projects should also be implemented in accordance with World Bank policies and applicable
Legal Agreements. Under these projects, no person will be discriminated against or stigmatized, and the principles of non-
discrimination and inclusion will be adhered to. Support should be provided to all project beneficiaries; (b) all
implementing entities of World Bank-financed projects should agree and implement specific mitigation measures to
address non-discrimination; (c) these mitigation measures will require enhancing Program Grievance Redress Mechanism
(GRM), as well as strengthening existing Program monitoring by implementing entities, including third-party monitoring
where applicable; and (d) each Program implementing entity shall develop comprehensive guidelines to address non-
discrimination.

112.     The World Bank will support enhanced monitoring of the risk of exclusion or discrimination for vulnerable and
marginalized individuals or groups, as well as the efficacy of the agreed mitigation measures. An Enhanced
Implementation Support and Monitoring (EISM) mechanism will primarily focus on supporting project teams to address
grievances and concerns from beneficiaries, communities, and workers relating to discrimination from project benefits.
This includes the implementation of a hotline for individuals, beneficiaries, communities, and workers to lodge complaints
of discrimination and exclusion under the project or voice their concerns without fear of reprisal. As part of the project
level GRM, a hotline (0800 333125), hosted and operated by a local non-governmental organization on behalf of the EISM
firm, has been established for vulnerable or marginalized individuals or groups to lodge complaints of discrimination. The
guidelines on how the hotline will be used and cases managed are provided in the Program E&S documents.

113.     Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank
supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to the existing
program grievance mechanism or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received
are promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit
their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which
determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures,
and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address
complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought
directly to the Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on
how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit https://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For



                                                                                                                    Page 44


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


information on how to submit              complaints    to   the    Bank’s   Accountability    Mechanism,     please   visit
https://accountability.worldbank.org.
  D. IPF appraisal

114.    Strategic focus and scope of IPF support. The IPF project will finance a targeted package of policy reforms, systems
development, implementation support, digital tools, subproject preparation, and ESHS strengthening to enable effective
program delivery.. The IPF activities will support the: i) policy reforms, strategies, and system development; (ii) program
management and verification; (iii) digital innovations and tools; (iv) subproject preparation and design; (v) ESHS
strengthening; and (vi) a dedicated window for host communities and refugees. No direct compensation whether cash or
in kind will be made under the IPF project. However, government should ensure that a dedicated budget is maintained to
ensure timely counterpart funding for resettlement expenditures, where required.

115.     The IPF will finance a targeted package of policy reforms. The policy and system package will support a review
and amendment of the Physical Planning Act; update of the National Urban Policy and preparation of the urban
development legal framework; development of a climate-smart and inclusive urban infrastructure framework; preparation
of revenue strategies and IRAS enhancement measures; and preparation of the SWM materials recovery strategy. These
actions are intended to establish coherent legal, policy, and technical guidance for consistent application across national
institutions and participating local governments, including clearer implementation protocols and institutional roles.
Technical support for this activity will be provided through consulting firms with appropriate expertise.

116.     Digital systems and upstream technical preparation. To strengthen integrated urban planning and investment
readiness, the IPF project will finance development and rollout of an AI-enabled Urban Data and GIS platform that
incorporates urban planning tools, integrated transport planning functions, and O&M automation modules. It will also
support preparation of Cities and Municipalities PDPs and upstream technical designs required for implementation,
including engineering designs across the five pillars for newly participating municipalities/cities, designs for green
investments and nature-based solutions in existing urban entities, review and update of SWM strategies in existing
jurisdictions together with preparation of SWM strategies for new municipalities/cities, and preparation of storm water
drainage master plans for newly participating municipalities.

117.    Strengthening ESHS Capacity of Institutions and Systems. Providing technical support for ESHS systems
improvements and strengthening the capacity of key Operation MDAs, including MoLHUD, MoGLSD, and NEMA, Program
LGs, and contractors to improve ESHS performance, through supervision of labor and OHS, environmental and social and
OSH audits and monitoring, strengthening of the Program grievance management systems, the preparation, introduction
and implementation of the stakeholder engagement and communication strategy, support to land ownership due
diligence and cadaster updates, and capacity building training on ESHS through recognized training institutions.

118.     Window for Host Communities and Refugees. In parallel, the IPF project will support a window for host
communities and refugees, including studies and situation analysis, design of subprojects, independent verification
support, physical planning and supervision, beneficiary satisfaction surveys, and support to land administration through
due diligence on land ownership and land titling for LED investments, as well as supervision support in refugee-hosting
districts.

119.    Institutional arrangements and implementation management. MoLHUD will be responsible for overall
coordination and management of the IPF project, including procurement, financial management, ESHS coordination, and
reporting. IPF-financed program management activities will include engagement and supervision of the Independent


                                                                                                                    Page 45


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)            PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


Verification Agent for APA and DLI verification, value-for-money assessments, procurement audits, mid-term review, end-
of-program evaluation, Program Support Team staffing, supervision logistics, beneficiary satisfaction surveys, and impact
assessment support for USMID and USMID AF. MoLHUD, in consultation with MoGLSD, will oversee labor and OHS
supervision and inspection across program sites, while also managing E&S and OSH audits, grievance management system
strengthening, and stakeholder engagement and communication support. NEMA will lead quarterly joint multisectoral
compliance monitoring of approved program subprojects. Detailed implementation responsibilities and activity listings
are provided in Annex 2.

 Table 8: Program Action Plan
  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrannexprogramactionplan#doctemplate
                                                                                                        Completion
                                               DLI                                                      Measuremen
  Action Description        Source             #       Responsibility   Timing                          t
  1. Develop, implement,    Technical          NA      MoLHUD, PST      Due Date     31-Jul-2026        MoLHUD
  and improve                                                                                           report
  methodology for data
  collection for Results
  Framework
  2. Facilitate and         Technical          NA      MoLHUD,          Recurren     Continuous         MoLHUD
  support subnational                                  NPA              t                               report
  entities to select and
  prioritize investments
  across all Program
  pillars
  3. MoLHUD to focus on     Technical          NA      MoLHUD, PST      Recurren     Continuous         MoLHUD
  coordination/oversight                               immediate        t                               report
  , IEs on
  implementation
  4. Identify policy and    Technical          NA      MoLHUD,          Recurren     Continuous         MoLHUD
  operational issues to                                MoFPED,          t                               report
  improve Own Source                                   MoLG
  Revenue (OSR), with
  focus on property tax
  5. Assess                 Technical          NA      MoLHUD,          Other        Year 2 and         MoLHUD
  environmental and                                    MWE, NEMA,                    annually           report
  climate change aspects                               NPA
  during all phases of
  infrastructure
  planning,
  implementation,
  completion and O&M



                                                                                                                 Page 46


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)       PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    Operation (P511300)


6. Ensure debarred          Fiduciary      NA     PPDA, LGs        Recurren   Continuous        MoLHUD
firms/individuals are       Systems                                t                            report
excluded from
Program contracts
7. Improving ESHS risk      Environmenta   NA     MoLHUD,          Other      During program    MoLHUD
management through:         l and Social          NEMA,                       implementatio     report
(i) Updating ESHS           Systems               MGLSD,                      n (continuous)
procedures, templates,                            MDAs, LGs,
and guidelines; (ii)                              PPDA
Streamlining ESIA
requirements, fast
track ESIA reviews; (iii)
Enhancing E&S
monitoring at the local
government level
8. Develop urban            Environmenta   NA     MoLHUD,          Due Date   30-Jun-2027       MoLHUD
gender mainstreaming        l and Social          MoGLSD, LGs                                   report
strategy                    Systems
9. Strengthening ESHS       Environmenta   NA     Learning         Recurren   Yearly            MoLHUD
professional practice       l and Social          Centers          t                            report
of staff in                 Systems               (MAK),
Cities/Municipalities                             MHLUD,
RHDs, LGs and                                     Cities,
practitioners, including                          Municipalities
OSH/CH.                                           , RHDs, LGs

10. Enhancing OHS and       Environmenta   NA     MoLHUD,          Other      • By the end of   MoLHUD
labor conditions            l and Social          MoGLSD,                     Year 1 • During   report
supervisory and             Systems               NEMA, LGs                   Program
enforcement functions                                                         implementatio
at the District and                                                           n (continuous)
community levels in
coordination with the
Department of Labour
(DOSH) within the
Ministry of Gender
Labour and Social
Development.
11. Developing and          Environmenta   NA     MoLHUD, LGs,     Other      During Program    MoLHUD
enforcing a plan for        l and Social          MoGLSD,                     implementatio     report
the acquisition of land     Systems               Chief                       n (continuous)
and involuntary



                                                                                                       Page 47


                                                                                                  Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)       PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    Operation (P511300)


resettlement including                            Government
impacts on livelihoods.                           Valuer

12. Operationalize         Technical       NA     MoLHUD, PST      Recurren   Continuous        MoLHUD
M&E for all MDG and                                                t                            report
ISG indicators at
national and
subnational level
13. Automate DLI           Technical       NA     MoLHUD, PST,     Other      June 30, 2027     MoLHUD
verification system and                           IVA                                           report
link with national
performance
assessment
14. Technical Support      Fiduciary       NA     MoLHUD, PST,     Recurren   Continuous        MoLHUD
to address weak            Systems                MoFPED, LGs,     t                            report
procurement capacity                              MoPS,
at National and Local                             Attorney
Government Level                                  General

15. Technical Support      Fiduciary       NA     MoLHUD, PST,     Recurren   Continuous        MoLHUD
to address low level of    Systems                Mofped, LGs,     t                            report
compliance with                                   PPDA,
procurement                                       Attorney
procedures and                                    General
regulations, delays in                            'Office
procurement
16. Enhancing              Environmenta    NA     MoLHUD,          Other      • By the end of   MoLHUD
grievance                  l and Social           Cities,                     Year 1 • During   report
management through         Systems                Municipalities              Program
an integrated                                     , RHDs                      implementatio
information                                                                   n (continuous)
management system
(IMS)
17. Strengthening          Environmenta    NA     MHLUD            Recurren   Continuous        MHLUD
accountability for ESHS    l and Social                            t                            report
compliance by IVA and      Systems
supervision
consultants
18. Develop a financial    Fiduciary       NA     MoLHUD           Other      Year 1            A tool
resource management        Systems                                                              developed
tool to track fund flows                                                                        and used by
and contract status                                                                             all LGs



                                                                                                         Page 48


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)            PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


  across multi-year
  projects
  19. Carry out at least     Fiduciary         NA      MoLHUD           Other        Year 1             Consolidated
  consolidated annual        Systems                                                                    annual
  internal audit review                                                                                 internal audit
  of the program                                                                                        review report

  20. All contracts shall    Fiduciary         NA      MoLHUD           Recurren     Yearly             Annual
  be subject to Open         Systems                                    t                               procurement
  Competitive Bidding as                                                                                report
  provided for by the
  PPDA Act
  21. Capacity building of   Fiduciary         NA      MoLHUD           Recurren     Yearly             Training
  MLHUD/LGs on               Systems                                    t                               provided to
  financial management,                                                                                 LGs
  procurement and
  contract management
  22. Compliance with        Environmenta      NA      Cities,          Recurren     Continuous          APA Report
  Integration,               l and Social              Municipalities   t
  enforcement and            Systems                   , Districts
  monitoring of ESHS                                   Hosting
  provisions in all                                    Refugees
  contracts and
  application of
  sanctions for non-
  performance in cities,
  municipalities and
  refugee host districts.
  A total of US$ 5 million
  will be for WHR.



 V. KEY RISKS

120.    Overall Risk is Substantial. Despite drawing on strong lessons from USMID and GKMA, the combined risks of
governance, fiduciary management, environmental and social risk management, institutional capacity, and stakeholder
dynamics result in an overall substantial risk rating for the program. These risks are addressed through a deliberate
strategy of embedding risk mitigation into the program’s DLIs, ensuring that performance incentives drive improvements
in governance, fiduciary management, safeguards, and institutional capacity. A program action plan will establish a joint
MoLHUD–MoFPED–World Bank risk monitoring task force, reporting semi-annually to the PSC, to ensure proactive
management of these risks throughout program implementation.




                                                                                                                 Page 49


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


121.     Political and Governance Risk is Substantial. The program faces political and governance risks arising from
fragmented institutional arrangements, weak coordination, and potential political interference in program
implementation and project selection. These challenges could undermine transparency and accountability in
infrastructure delivery, particularly in the urban sector where vested interests around land development are strong. To
mitigate these risks, the program embeds requirements for effective oversight through the Program Steering Committee
and Program Technical Committee, with their decisions published to ensure accountability. Governance improvements
will be reinforced through performance-based transfers tied to transparent APA scoring and Value for Money audit
conducted by the Auditor General.

122.     Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability Risk is Substantial. Capacity constraints remain a
significant risk due to limited technical staff, high turnover in municipalities, and weak systems for sustaining infrastructure
through O&M. Without institutional strengthening, the sustainability of investments is uncertain. The program addresses
this by linking DLIs to LG allocations of at least five percent of capital expenditure to O&M budgets, thereby
institutionalizing sustainable asset management. The IPF project will finance capacity-building, digital platforms, and
upstream support. The program action plan will include the roll-out of standardized ISG training modules by MoLHUD.

123.     Fiduciary Risk is Substantial. Main fiduciary risks include: (i) budget and planning challenges such as lack of multi-
year planning, delayed revoting of unused LG resources, low budget utilization and incomprehensive procurement
planning; (ii) delayed release of funds to implementing entities and sweeping back of fund at year end; (iii) account
recording irregularities and delayed reporting from LGs on use of resources; (iv)internal control weaknesses identified
both on internal and external audit reports and delayed actions on these; (v) understaffing of the internal audit unit at the
LGs and inadequate internal audit review; (vi) lack of comprehensive reporting on fraud and corruption cases under the
program; (vii) procurement delay and non-compliance with procurement policies; and (viii) contract management
challenges resulting in delayed payments, stalled work, incurred penalties, and contract non-compliance. These risks are
mitigated the Program design and actions, including fiduciary-related minimum access conditions for DLI 2 (e.g., certified
Chief Finance Officers and internal auditors in place; submission of annual performance contracts covering workplans,
budgets and procurement; prior-year financial performance reports; annual internal audit workplans and reviews; and
audit opinions that are not adverse or disclaimers). Furthermore, the program action plan will require: (a) the
development of a financial resource management tool to monitor fund flows and contract status across multi-year
projects; (b) conducting at least annual internal audit reviews of the program; (c) subjecting all contracts to Open
Competitive Bidding pursuant to the PPDA Act; and (d) capacity building for MLHUD/LGs on financial management,
procurement and contract management. Semiannual fraud and corruption reporting will be mandated within the
financing agreement, while semiannual financial reporting will be stipulated in the disbursement and financial information
letter (DFIL). The OIM will lay out internal control procedures for financial management and procurement.

124.     Environmental, Social, Risk is Substantial. The PforR Program is rated Substantial due to the nature of urban
infrastructure investments, their locations in dense urban settings, and capacity constraints to implement effective ESHS
risk management. The IPF project is also rated Substantial (ESS1–6, ESS8 and ESS10): while IPF activities are primarily
upstream with limited direct impacts (e.g., e-waste, energy use, and OHS risks from travel/fieldwork), the policies,
systems, and detailed designs it finances will influence downstream PforR investments and could amplify environmental
and social risks if E&S requirements are not fully integrated. Key social risks include weak stakeholder engagement and
inclusion (with heightened exclusion risks in the context of the Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2023), land
acquisition/compensation challenges, and insufficient grievance mechanisms (including SEA/SH-sensitive channels and a
worker GM). Mitigation measures, reflected across the ESSA/ESCP/IPF instruments, include: (a) strengthening ESHS
capacity of implementing teams and project actors (including training on non-discrimination and inclusion); (b) embedding


                                                                                                                        Page 50


                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      Operation (P511300)


enforceable provisions in contracts and codes of conduct, including hiring and whistle-blower protections, to enable
remediation of discrimination; (c) establishing a dedicated mechanism (including a hotline) to receive, report, remediate,
and track discrimination-related grievances with World Bank reporting and follow-up; and (d) strengthening data
management to protect personal information in a safe, ethical, and confidential manner.

125.     Stakeholders Risk is Substantial. High expectations from citizens, CSOs, and political leaders pose stakeholder
risks, particularly in refugee-hosting districts where competition over resources could fuel tensions if program benefits
are perceived as unequal. In addition, weak incentives for private sector participation in solid waste and local economic
development may limit the sustainability of interventions. Mitigation strategies include DLIs linked to active Municipal
Development Forums and structured consultations in refugee-hosting districts. The program action plan will require LGs
to publish investment plans and APA scores and to strengthen MDF capacities, including ensuring gender-inclusive
participation.

126.     Other Risk is substantial: The project includes financing from the WHR, and there is a potential risk that the
country will not maintain an adequate protection framework for refugees. Uganda has long had progressive laws and
policies and an open-door response to forced displacement. However, large new refugee inflows over the last two years,
ongoing instability in the great lakes’ region and major cuts to humanitarian aid pose risk to the protection framework.
Accordingly, the other risk level related to WHR financing is rated Substantial. This demonstrates the urgency of increasing
the provision of long-term and sustainable solutions to refugee-hosting areas, while balancing support for refugees and
host communities. The project will maintain the ongoing close consultation/monitoring with UNHCR and continue the
dialogue with the Government.




                                                                                                                    Page 51


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                                                                   PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P511300)



                                                                       ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrannexpolicyandresult#doctemplate
Program Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to enhance the institutional performance of selected urban local governments and ministries for urban planning and management and improve
access to climate smart infrastructure, services and jobs for urban residents and displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas.


PDO Indicators by Outcomes


   Baseline                                                                                  Closing Period
   Enhanced institutional capacity of city, municipal and national institutions for urban management
   Participating LGs meeting annual minimum institutional performance benchmarks. (Percentage)
   Mar/2026                                                                                  Jun/2032
   0                                                                                         100
   Participating central government ministries meeting annual institutional performance benchmarks. (Percentage)
   Mar/2026                                                                                  Jun/2032
   0                                                                                         80
   People in urban areas provided with improved climate smart infrastructure and services
   Direct beneficiaries in urban areas provided with improved living conditions through access to climate smart infrastructure and services (Number) DLI
   Mar/2026                                                                                  Jun/2032
   0                                                                                         5,600,000
     Female beneficiaries (Number) DLI
   Mar/2026                                                                                  Jun/2032
   0                                                                                         2,800,000
     Direct beneficiaries are are host community residents from RHDs (Number) DLI
   Mar/2026                                                                                  Jun/2032
   0                                                                                         1,000,000
     Direct beneficiaries who are refugees (Number) DLI
   Mar/2026                                                                                  Jun/2032
   0                                                                                         600,000



                                                                                                                                                                    Page 52


                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                                                            PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P511300)



   More and better jobs created in urban areas
   People in urban areas provided with more jobs (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                                            Jun/2032
   0                                                                                   40,000
     Female (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                                            Jun/2032
   0                                                                                   20,000
     Youths (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                                            Jun/2032
   0                                                                                   25,000
     Refugee host community (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                                            Jun/2032
   0                                                                                   6,000
     Refugees (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                                            Jun/2032
   0                                                                                   4,000


Intermediate Indicators by Results Areas


   Baseline                                                                                Closing Period
   Enhanced local and national level government institutional capacity and performance for sustainable urban management
   MoLHUD demonstrate enhanced institutional performance for urban/investment planning, coordination & management to support the LGs as assessed by IVA (Percentage) DLI
   Mar/2026                                                                                Jun/2032
   0                                                                                       90
   MoLG demonstrate strengthened institutional performance in governance and supporting LGs for decentralized service delivery and OSR mobilization as assessed by an IVA
   (Percentage) DLI
   Mar/2026                                                                                Jun/2032
   0                                                                                       90
   Urban LGs and Refugee Hosting Districts with required staff in place demonstrating improved performance in thematic areas as assessed by IVA in APA (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                                                Jun/2032
   20                                                                                      47
   Female representation in decision-making committees supported by the Program (Percentage)
   Mar/2026                                                                                Dec/2031


                                                                                                                                                                        Page 53


                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                                                               PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    (P511300)


22                                                                                         30
Increased access to sustainable urban infrastructure, services and jobs
Program LGs have achieved value for money annual targets in the delivery of sustainable infrastructure investments as assessed by the IVA in annual performance assessment
(Percentage) DLI
Mar/2026                                                                                   Jun/2032
50                                                                                         80
Program LGs that have successfully met targets set out for O&M systems for all urban major infrastructure (Number) DLI
Mar/2026                                                                                   Jun/2032
21                                                                                         36
Program LGs have planned and delivered climate smart strategic local economic infrastructure investments targets which generate employment opportunities (Number) DLI
Mar/2026                                                                                   Jun/2032
0                                                                                          36
Urban Local Governments with functional O&M systems for all major urban infrastructure as measured by the achievement of annual targets set verified by an IVA (Number) DLI
Mar/2026                                                                                   Jun/2032
0                                                                                          47
More and better jobs created in urban areas and refugees host communities
Short-term jobs meeting ESHS standards created through Program-financed infrastructure investments (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                   Jun/2032
0                                                                                          20,000
  Short-term jobs meeting ESHS standards created in for host community residents through Program-financed infrastructure investments (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                   Jun/2032
0                                                                                          6,000
  Short-term jobs meeting ESHS standards created for refugees through Program-financed infrastructure investments (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                   Jun/2032
0                                                                                          4,000
Permanent jobs created through urban infrastructure, services, LED facilities and infrastructure (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                   Jun/2032
0                                                                                          20,000
  Permanent jobs created for host community residents through urban infrastructure, services, LED facilities and infrastructure (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                   Jun/2032
0                                                                                          3,000
  Permanent jobs created for refugees through urban infrastructure, services, LED facilities and infrastructure (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                   Jun/2032
0                                                                                          2,000
Number of businesses supported through program-financed LED facilities and infrastructure (Number)


                                                                                                                                                                         Page 54


                                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                                                                 PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P511300)


   Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2032
   0                                                                                           500
   Number of people trained through the facilities (vocational and skilling training centers) supported by the program (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2032
   0                                                                                           1,000
   Program LGs have strengthened institutional capacity in planning and delivering local climate smart and ESHS compliant investments that transform livelihoods of the host
   communities and refugees (Percentage)
   Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2032
   0                                                                                           80



Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLI)


   Period                                                                                   Period Definition
   Period 1                                                                                 FY 2026/2027
   Period 2                                                                                 FY2027/2028
   Period 3                                                                                 FY2028/2029
   Period 4                                                                                 FY2029/2030
   Period 5                                                                                 FY2030/2031
   Period 6                                                                                 FY2031/2032



   Baseline                   Period 1               Period 2              Period 3                 Period 4                   Period 5               Period 6
   1:Program LGs with ISG Plans that meet the minimum required conditions as assessed by the independent verification agent during the annual performance assessment. A total
   of US$ 5.0 million will be towards WHR. (Yes/No )
   No                         Yes                    Yes                   Yes                      Yes                        Yes                    Yes
   0.00                       4.00                   4.00                  4.00                     4.00                       4.00                   0.00
   DLI allocation                                    20.00                                          As a % of Total DLI Allocation                    4.49%
   2:MoLHUD demonstrate enhanced institutional performance for urban/investment planning, coordination & management to support the LGs as assessed by IVA (Percentage )
   0                          50%                    60%                   70%                      80%                        85%                    90%
   0.00                       1.80                   1.80                  1.80                     1.80                       1.80                   1.00




                                                                                                                                                                               Page 55


                                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                                                               PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    (P511300)


DLI allocation                                       10.00                                            As a % of Total DLI Allocation                   2.25%
3:People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people )
0                        400,000                     800,000                  1,200,000               1,600,000                  1,600,000             1,600,000
0.00                     15.00                       20.00                    20.00                   20.00                      10.00                 0.00
DLI allocation                                       85.00                                            As a % of Total DLI Allocation                   19.1%
   3.1:People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people )
0                        200,000                     400,000                  600,000                 800,000                    800,000               800,000
0.00                     0.00                        0.00                     0.00                    0.00                       0.00                  0.00
DLI allocation                                       0.00                                             As a % of Total DLI Allocation                   0%
   3.2:People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people )
0                        300,000                     450,000                  700,000                 1,000,000                  1,000,000             1,000,000
0.00                     0.00                        0.00                     0.00                    0.00                       0.00                  0.00
DLI allocation                                       0.00                                             As a % of Total DLI Allocation                   0%
4:Refugees supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods (Number of people )
0                        200,000                     300,000                  400,000                 600,000                    600,000               600,000
0.00                     7.00                        10.00                    9.00                    6.00                       3.00                  0.00
DLI allocation                                       35.00                                            As a % of Total DLI Allocation                   7.87%
   4.1:Refugees supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods - Female (Number of people )
0                        100,000                     150,000                  200,000                 300,000                    300,000               300,000
0.00                     0.00                        0.00                     0.00                    0.00                       0.00                  0.00
DLI allocation                                       0.00                                             As a % of Total DLI Allocation                   0%
   4.2:Refugees supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods - Youth (Number of people )
0                        80,000                      120,000                  180,000                 250,000                    250,000               250,000
0.00                     0.00                        0.00                     0.00                    0.00                       0.00                  0.00
DLI allocation                                       0.00                                             As a % of Total DLI Allocation                   0%
5:Program LGs have planned and delivered climate smart strategic local economic infrastructure investments targets which generate employment opportunities (Number )
0                        25%                         35%                      50%                     70%                        85%                   85%
0.00                     15.00                       20.00                    20.00                   12.00                      8.00                  0.00
DLI allocation                                       75.00                                            As a % of Total DLI Allocation                   16.85%
6:Program LGs have achieved value for money annual targets in the delivery of sustainable infrastructure investments as assessed by the IVA in annual performance assessment
(Percentage )
50%                      60%                         70%                      75%                     80%                        85%                   85%


                                                                                                                                                                          Page 56


                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                                                              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    (P511300)


0.00                       15.00                   18.00                     16.00                     14.00                      7.00                0.00
DLI allocation                                     70.00                                               As a % of Total DLI Allocation                 15.73%
7:People in host communities supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods (Number of people )
0                          200,000                 400,000                   600,000                   800,000                    1,000,000           1,000,000
0.00                       7.00                    10.00                     9.00                      6.00                       3.00                0.00
DLI allocation                                     35.00                                               As a % of Total DLI Allocation                 7.87%
   7.1:People in host communities supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods - Female (Number of people )
0                          100,000                 200,000                   300,000                   400,000                    500,000             500,000
0.00                       0.00                    0.00                      0.00                      0.00                       0.00                0.00
DLI allocation                                     0.00                                                As a % of Total DLI Allocation                 0%
   7.2:People in host communities supported with accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods - Youth (Number of people )
0                          150,000                 250,000                   300,000                   350,000                    400,000             400,000
0.00                       0.00                    0.00                      0.00                      0.00                       0.00                0.00
DLI allocation                                     0.00                                                As a % of Total DLI Allocation                 0%
8:Program LGs that have successfully met targets set out for O&M systems for all urban major infrastructure (Number )
21%                        40%                     60%                       70%                       80%                        85%                 85%
0.00                       18.00                   20.00                     14.00                     10.00                      8.00                0.00
DLI allocation                                     70.00                                               As a % of Total DLI Allocation                 15.73%
9:MoLG demonstrate strengthened institutional performance in governance and supporting LGs for decentralized service delivery and OSR mobilization as assessed by an IVA
(Percentage )
0                          50%                     60%                       70%                       80%                        85%                 90%
0.00                       .90                     .90                       .90                       .90                        .90                 .50
DLI allocation                                     5.00                                                As a % of Total DLI Allocation                 1.12%
10:Urban Local Governments with functional O&M systems for all major urban infrastructure as measured by the achievement of annual targets set verified by an IVA (Number )
0                          10                      26                        47                        47                         47                  47
0.00                       0.00                    0.00                      0.00                      0.00                       0.00                0.00
DLI allocation                                     0.00                                                As a % of Total DLI Allocation                 0%
11:Direct beneficiaries in urban areas provided with improved living conditions through access to climate smart infrastructure and services (Number )
0                          400,000                 800,000                   1,200,000                 4,800,000                  5,600,000           5,600,000
0.00                       0.00                    0.00                      0.00                      0.00                       0.00                0.00
DLI allocation                                     0.00                                                As a % of Total DLI Allocation                 0%
   11.1:Direct beneficiaries are are host community residents from RHDs (Number )


                                                                                                                                                                        Page 57


                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                                                                  PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    (P511300)


0                          100,000                     400,000            800,000                   1,200,000                  1,600,000               1,600,000
0.00                       0.00                        0.00               0.00                      0.00                       0.00                    0.00
DLI allocation                                         0.00                                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     0%
   11.2:Female beneficiaries (Number )
0                          200,000                     400,000            600,000                   2,400,000                  2,800,000               2,800,000
0.00                       0.00                        0.00               0.00                      0.00                       0.00                    0.00
DLI allocation                                         0.00                                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     0%
   11.3:Direct beneficiaries who are refugees (Number )
0                          50,000                      150,000            300,000                   400,000                    600,000                 600,000
0.00                       0.00                        0.00               0.00                      0.00                       0.00                    0.00
DLI allocation                                         0.00                                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     0%
12:22. Compliance with Integration, enforcement and monitoring of ESHS provisions in all contracts and application of sanctions for non-performance in cities, municipalities and
refugee host districts. A total of US$ 5 million will be for WHR. (Text )
50%                        60%                         70%                80%                       85%                        90%                     90%
0.00                       10.00                       8.00               8.00                      8.00                       6.00                    0.00
DLI allocation                                         40.00                                        As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     8.99%




                                                                                                                                                                              Page 58


                                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)                            PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
         (P511300)



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes


 Enhanced institutional capacity of city, municipal and national institutions for urban management
                            This is to measure the extent to which Program LGs and central government ministries have met the annual
 Description
                           institutional performance targets for urban management and service delivery
 Frequency                  Annually
 Data source                Annual Performance Assessment (APA) report
 Methodology for Data
                           Private Independent Verification Agency (IVA) will carry out the APA
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                           IVA and MoLHUD
 Collection
 People in urban areas provided with improved living conditions through access to smart climate infrastructure and
 services
                           This measures the average annual score of value of investments that contribute to climate change mitigation and
 Description
                           adaptation out of total investment under the Program.
 Frequency                 Annually
 Data source               Annual Performance Assessment (APA) report
 Methodology for Data
                           Private Independent Verification Agency (IVA) will carry out the APA
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                           IVA and MoLHUD
 Collection
 People in urban areas provided with more and better jobs
                           This measures the average annual score of the value of investments that contributes to jobs out of total investment
 Description
                           under the Program.
 Frequency                 Annually
 Data source               Annual Performance Assessment (APA) report
 Methodology for Data
                            Private Independent Verification Agency (IVA) will carry out the APA
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                            IVA and MoLHUD
 Collection




                                                                                                                                         Page 59


                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Verification Protocol: Disbursement Linked Indicators

DLI 1: Program LGs have met the Institutional Strengthening Grants (ISG) minimum required access conditions, including climate resilient
urban planning and designs, ESHS management and own-source revenue (OSR) improvement action plans and targets set out in the verification
protocol – Number.
Formula                  (Allocated Amount/ 36) x Number of Program Local Governments (LGs) that have met the ISG Minimum Conditions
                         (i) The indicator will be satisfied when the annual performance assessment has been completed (based on the
                         minimum conditions and performance indicators) and the allocation based on the score of all LGs has been
                         determined.
                          Program LGs have developed and implemented (from year 2) an ISP as defined in the OIM with:
                          •   At least 20% of the resources allocated to green and climate change activities
                          •   At least 10% of resources allocated to activities promoting job creation
Description
                          •   At least 10% of the resources allocated to ESHS strengthening.
                          •   At least 5% of the resources allocated to gender activities
                          •   At least 5% of the resources allocated to OSR Action Plan implementation.

                          (ii) The participating LG has adhered to the eligible expenditures (Investment menu) for the use of the Institutional
                          Strengthening Grant in previous FY year (applicable from year 2).

Data source/ Agency       From the implementing entities (cities and municipalities)
Verification Entity       Independent Verifiation Agency (IVA)
Procedure                 Annual Performance Assessment
DLI 2: Program LGs have met the minimum required access conditions for the Urban Development (UDG) as measured by substantively filled key
staff positions, demonstrated basic capacities in development planning, financial management (fiduciary safeguards), 80% readiness conditions
met for the design package, including ESHS, land/RoW acquisition evidence and program specific requirements as verified through the APA -
Number.
Formula                     (Allocated Amount/36) x Number of Program LGs that have met the UDG Minimum Conditions.
                            The indicator will be satisfied when compliant LGs have met the minimum conditions based on APA by an IVA.
                                 •    LG has substantively filled key staff positions defined in the Performance Assessment Tool.
                                 •    LG has met the minimum conditions for development planning:
                                            o The LG has a Council approved UCMID Capital Investment Plan that meets the
                                                 appraisal/prioritization criteria (first year only).
                                            o The LG has submitted an annual performance contract of the current FY that among others
                                                 includes annual work-plan, budget and procurement plan that includes all activities to be
                                                 implemented by the deadline issued by MoFPED.
                                            o The participating LG submitted the Annual Performance Report for the previous FY on or
                                                 before July 31st or the deadline as determined by MoFPED of the current Financial Year
                                 •    LG meets at least 80% readiness for the design package (completed designs and bidding documents, ESIA
                                      report approved, 100% RoW acquired or at least 40% of the scope of work continuous sections on both
Description
                                      sides acquired)
                                 •    LG has demonstrated basic capacities in financial management:
                                            o The participating LG Internal Audit function is being executed in accordance with section 46 of
                                                 the PFMA 2015 and Sec 94 of the LGA
                                            o The audit opinion of LG Financial Statement for the previous FY is not adverse or disclaimer.
                                 •    LG has met all Program specific requirements, including climate change:
                                            o The LG has signed a Participation Agreement/MoU with MoLHUD
                                            o The LG has a functional City/Municipal Development Forum
                                            o The LG has carried out climate change risk and vulnerability assessment and prepared climate
                                                 action plans (from year 2)
                                            o The LG adheres to the eligible expenditures (investment menu) for the use of funds in the
                                                 previous year (from year 2)
Data source/ Agency          From the implementing entities (cities and municipalities)
Verification Entity          Independent Verifiation Agency (IVA)
Procedure                    Annual Performance Assessment




                                                                                                                                                  60


                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
DLI 3: Program LGs have prepared and implemented their action plans and delivered climate-risk and ESHS compliant works as verified
through the APA by the IVA.
                            [Average scores of all Program LGs/ target score for the Fiscal Year] x Allocated Amount (Scalable i.e. full
Formula                     allocation, if score meets the corresponding target for the Fiscal Year; pro-rata reduction/ increase if score below/
                            above the corresponding target for the Fiscal Year).
                            This measures the average annual score of the LGs meeting set targets in the seven Thematic Areas as outlined
                            below and assessed through APA by an IVA.
                                 •   Development and Implementation of Physical Development Plans (budgeting for green climate-resilient
                                     and low-carbon infrastructure investments that create jobs) – max score 20%
                                       o Evidence of a functional physical planning committee
                                       o Evidence that LG has screened investments in the annual work plan for green, low-carbon and
                                            climate resilience as per the screening checklist, prioritized according to the criteria provided in the
                                            OIM and the designs and costing incorporate climate resilience aspects.
                                 •   Own Source Revenue Generation – max score 12%
                                      o Evidence LG has implemented revenue mobilization strategies in the last financial year.
                                      o Evidence LG increased its own source revenue in the last financial year compared to the one before
                                           the previous financial year (last FY but one).
                                 •   Procurement – max score 10%
                                       o Quality of sub-national procurement regarding economy, efficiency as well as green, low carbon and
Description                                 climate resilience aspects.
                                 •   Financial Management – max score 10%
                                        o Evidence LG maintains a detailed and updated assets register.
                                        o Evidence LG properly executes the Internal Audit Function.
                                 •   Execution of investment plans that contribute to climate change mitigation & adaptation – max score 30%
                                       o LG has achieved the average implementation percentage of targets set in the previous FY work plan
                                       o LG has achieved average percentage score of value of investments that are green and climate
                                            change relevant out of total investment under the Program in a FY.
                                 •   Monitoring, Enhanced Accountability, Transparency and Communication – max score 8%
                                      o Evidence that the LG has shared key information with and responded to the issues raised by the
                                           councilors and citizens.
                                      o The entity has put in place a system to respond to the feedback/complaints provided by citizens.
                                 •   Environmental and social safeguards Performance – max score 10%
                                       o     Evidence LG has sufficiently addressed ESHS risks during the planning and designing of investments
Data source/ Agency         From the implementing entities (cities and municipalities)
Verification Entity         Independent Verifiation Agency (IVA)
Procedure                   Annual Performance Assessment
DLI 4: Program LGs have completed climate smart strategic local economic infrastructure investments which generate employment
opportunities as assessed through APA by an IVA - Percentage
Formula                     [Average scores of all Program LGs/ target score for the Fiscal Year] x Allocated Amount (Scalable).
                            This measures the average annual score of the LGs meeting set targets for new and better jobs created during
                            construction and permanent jobs after completion of investments under the Program.
                                 •    Number of LGs meeting targets set for new and better jobs created during construction of infrastructure
                                      (roads and associated investments, SWM, markets, training centres and resource centres).
                                 •    Number of LGs meeting targets set for new and better permanent jobs created after infrastructure
Description
                                      investments.
                                 •    Number businesses provided with better working conditions, based stalls allocation lists (at least 30%
                                      must be women).
                                 •    At least 50% of the people who have benefited from the program reporting improved living conditions
                                      after six months.
Data source/ Agency         From the implementing entities (cities and municipalities)
Verification Entity          Independent Verifiation Agency (IVA)



                                                                                                                                                       61


                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Procedure                     Annual Performance Assessment
DLI 5: Program LGs have achieved value for money in the implementation of climate smart infrastructure investments, demonstrating
economy, efficiency, effectiveness, and ESHS management as assessed by the Office of Auditor General through annual Value for Money
Audits – Percentage.
Formula                      [Average scores of all Program LGs/target score for the Fiscal Year] x Allocated Amount (Scalable).
                             This measures the average annual score of value of investments that meet the annual targets set for value for
                             money.
                                  •   LGs meeting parameters for economy in the delivery of infrastructure investments (score 20%)
Description                       •   LGs meeting parameters for efficiency the delivery of infrastructure investments (score 30%)
                                  •   LGs meeting parameters for effectiveness in the delivery of infrastructure investments (score 30%)
                                  •   LGs meeting parameters for ESHS compliance in the delivery of infrastructure investments (score 20%).

Data source/ Agency          From the implementing entities (cities and municipalities)
Verification Entity          Independent Verifiation Agency (IVA)
Procedure                    Annual Performance Assessment
DLI 6: Average annual score of Program LGs that have achieved the annual set targets in funding and executing O&M plans for all major
urban infrastructure as verified through APA by an IVA – Percentage.
Formula                      [Average scores of all Program LGs/target score for the Fiscal Year] x Allocated Amount (Scalable).
                             This measures the average annual score of the Program LGs that have achieved the annual set targets in executing
                             the O&M plans.
                                  •    Evidence that LG has carried out an annual infrastructure inventory and condition survey,
                                  •    O&M Plan approved which is consistent with O&M Strategy for all investments,
                                  •    Expenditure shows at least 80% of the budget on O&M,
Description
                                  •    At least 10% of the O&M budget is funded by OSRs,
                                  •    Evidence of corrective action plan as part of the Annual Compliance Audit,
                                  •    Evidence of an annual climate and disaster risk expenditure review (plans and budgets), and
                                  •    List of all major infrastructure assets that meet the asset conditions score (indicator carries 40% of the
                                       total points for this DLI).
Data source/ Agency          From the implementing entities (cities and municipalities)
Verification Entity          Independent Verifiation Agency (IVA)
Procedure                    Annual Performance Assessment
DLI 7: Program LGs have completed climate smart strategic local economic infrastructures that addressed the needs and generated economic
opportunities for refugees and host communities as assessed through the APA by and an IVA – Percentage.
Formula                      [Average scores of all Program LGs/target score for the Fiscal Year] x Allocated Amount (Scalable).
                             This measure demonstrates annual score of the Program LGs that have achieved the annual set targets in planning
                             and delivering local climate smart and ESHS compliant investments that transform livelihoods of the host
                             communities and refugees.
                                  •    Evidence that a LG has achieved the average implementation percentage of targets set in the Annual
                                       work plan for the previous FY.
                                  •    Evidence that a LG has achieved average percentage score of value of investments that are green and
                                       climate change relevant and promote jobs out of total investment under the Program.
Description                       •    Evidence that a LG has implemented revenue mobilization strategies in the last financial year and
                                       increased its own source revenue.
                                  •    Evidence that a LG has prepared and implemented a Strategic Action Plan and a Training Plan for jobs
                                       approved by council.
                                  •    Percentage of the people who have benefited from the program reporting improved living conditions
                                       after six months.
                                  •    Number people provided with better working conditions, based stalls allocation lists (at least 40% must
                                       be women).
Data source/ Agency          From the implementing entities (District Local Governments hosting refugees)
Verification Entity          Independent Verifiation Agency (IVA)
Procedure                    Annual Performance Assessment




                                                                                                                                                    62


                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
DLI 8: Program LGs, including refugee hosting districts, have integrated, enforced, monitored Environmental, Social, Health and Safety (ESHS)
provisions in all contracts and imposed sanctions for non-performance to meet the target as assessed in the APA
Formula                       [Average scores of all Program LGs/target score for the Fiscal Year] x Allocated Amount (Scalable).
                              This measures the average annual score of the Program LGs that have achieved the annual set targets in enhancing
                              ESHS management.
                              DLR 8 – Environmental, Social, Health and Safety (ESHS) Compliance (total score of 100%)
                              A – Occupational & Community Health and Safety (40%)
                                   • All Cities, Municipalities, and RHDs maintain incident/accident logs.
                                   • Monthly monitoring of contractor OHS/Community Health Safety (CHS) compliance with corrective
                                        actions issued, verified, and sanctions applied for non-compliance.
                                   • At least 80% of corrective actions closed within stipulated timelines.
                                   • All serious incidents reported to MoGLSD’s OSH Department.
                              B – Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement (30%)
Description                        • Streamlined land acquisition plans prepared and approved by MLHUD/Chief Government Valuer.
                                   • Implementation of approved plans with land fully acquired and PAPs compensated prior to
                                        commencement of works.
                              C – Grievance Redress Mechanism (20%)
                                   • Functional, confidential GRM established at city/municipality/RHD level.
                                   • Grievance resolution within 30 days: ≥80%
                                   • Quarterly reporting to MoGLSD.
                              D – Environmental and Social Compliance Management (10%)
                                   • Joint quarterly E&S monitoring and annual ESHS audits completed for each subproject.
                                   • Corrective actions implemented and verified by supervision consultants.
                              Sanctions applied per contract for non-compliance.
Data source/ Agency           From the implementing entities (cities, municipalities and districts hosting refugees)
Verification Entity           Independent Verifiation Agency (IVA)
Procedure                     Annual Performance Assessment
DLI 9: MoLG has supported LGs to fill all key staff positions, enhance own source revenue collection and administration as well as local
economic development as assessed by the APA
Formula                       [MoLG score in implementation of its AWP/Target score for the Fiscal Year] x Allocated Amount (Scalable)
                              This measures achievement of the DLI determined based on aggregate score in meeting the targets specified in the
                              MoLG Institutional Strengthening Plan.
                                   •    Year 1: MoLG has prepared PIPs for the coming FY for supporting participating LGs (cities, municipalities
                                       and districts hosting refugees) including activities for enhancing (i) Number of Accounting Officers in
                                       place, with performance contracts (to be assessed annually for all the assessment period), (ii) staffing
Description                            levels and performance, (iii) own source revenue collection and administration; and (iv) local economic
                                       development in the current year as per format in the OIM, and that has been approved by the PTC.
                                  •    Year 2: MoLG has implemented at least 70% of the PIPs for LGs the previous FY
                                  •    Year 3: MoLG has implemented at least 80% of the PIPs for LGs the previous FY
                                  •    Year 4: MoLG has implemented at least 85% of the PIPs for LGs the previous FY
                                  •    Year 5: MoLG has implemented at least 90% of the PIPs for LGs the previous FY
Data source/ Agency        From the implementing entities (cities and municipalities)
Verification Entity        Independent Verifiation Agency (IVA)
Procedure                  Annual Performance Assessment
DLI 10: MoLHUD have executed annual performance improvement plans (PIPs) for program LGs which includes risk informed urban and
investment planning and valuation services as scored by APA.
Formula                    [MoLHUD score in implementation of its AWP/ target score for the Fiscal Year] x Allocated Amount (Scalable)
                           This measures achievement of the DLI determined on the basis of execution of activities specified in the MoLHUD
Description
                           Institutional Strengthening Plan.




                                                                                                                                                    63


                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                          Year 1: MoLHUD has prepared PIPs for the LGs for the coming FY, which includes among other things Resilient
                          Design Catalogue, city-level multi-hazard risk assessments, and Land Valuation Management Information System
                          scale up and valuation database.
                          Year 2: MoLHUD has implemented at least 70% of the PIPs for LGs the previous FY
                          Year 3: MoLHUD has implemented at least 80% of the PIPs for LGs the previous FY
                          Year 4: MoLHUD has implemented at least 85% of the PIPs for LGs the previous FY
                          Year 5: MoLHUD has implemented at least 90% of the PIPs for LGs the previous FY
 Data source/ Agency      From the implementing entities (cities and municipalities)
 Verification Entity      Independent Verifiation Agency (IVA)
 Procedure                Annual Performance Assessment




                                 ANNEX 2. INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING (IPF) PROJECT

Indicative activities and estimated costs for the IPF Project

 IPF Activity                                                                          Estimated         Responsible Entity       Link to
                                                                                       Amount (US$M)                              DLIs
 1.   Policy reforms on Integrated Urban Planning, City/municipal Land                      1.60                MoLHUD             DLI 1–7
      Administration and Development Control, strategies and system
      development.
 2.   Program Management and coordination, including M&E, IVA, VfM and                     12.44            MoLHUD, MoFPED,        All DLIs
      Procurement audits, OST                                                                                    PPDA
 3.   Digital Innovations and tools                                                         2.76            MoLHUD, MoWT,         DLIs 3, 6
      - PDP digital innovation, O&M automation system, integrated urban                                         NPA                and 10
           transport infrastructure planning database, land records and
           cadastral base maps.
 4.   Strengthening ESHS capacity of institutions and systems                                               MoGLSD, NEMA,           DLI 8
      - Strengthening MoGLSD & LGs capacity on Labor Management & OHS,                                        MoLHUD
      -   Institutional and system strengthening of NEMA on environmental
          management, strengthening ESHS capacity of MoLHUD, LGs & RHDs
 5.   Sub-Projects Designs                                                                  3.00             MoLHUD, Cities,      4, 5 and
      - Engineering designs in 15 new MCs, Engineering designs in the RHDs,                                  MCs and DLGd             7
          Design for Green Investments and NBS, Storm Water Drainage
          Master Plans

      Total                                                                                27.00




                                                                                                                                            64


                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
Annex 3: PforR Expenditure Framework
                                                                                                                           Overall
                                             FY2027/28
                             FY 2026/27                     FY 2028/29      FY 2029/30      FY 2030/31          Total      total
Entity                     GOV($m)IDA ($m) GOV($m)IDA ($m)GOV($m) IDA ($m)GOV($m)IDA ($m) GOV($m) IDA ($m) GOV($m) IDA ($m)($m)
MoLHUD                        0.8      2.0    1.0     2.0     1.2     2.0    1.4      2.0     1.7      2.0     6.0    10.0      16.0
MOLG                          0.6      1.0    0.7     1.0     0.9     1.0    1.1      1.0     1.3      1.0     4.6     5.0        9.6
Sub total National            1.4      3.0    1.7     3.0     2.1     3.0    2.5      3.0     3.0      3.0    10.6    15.0       25.6
Cities                                                                                                                 -          -
Arua                          1.0      8.2    1.2     9.0     1.5     8.2    1.8      6.5     2.2      4.0     7.7    35.9       43.6
FortPortal                    0.4      4.1    0.4     4.5     0.5     4.1    0.6      3.2     0.7      2.0     2.7    17.9       20.6
Gulu                          1.3      5.7    1.5     6.2     1.8     5.7    2.2      4.5     2.6      2.8     9.4    24.9       34.3
Hoima                         0.8      4.2    1.0     4.6     1.2     4.2    1.4      3.3     1.7      2.0     6.0    18.3       24.3
Jinja                         1.9      6.5    2.2     7.0     2.7     6.5    3.2      5.1     3.9      3.1    13.9    28.2       42.1
Lira                          0.4      5.9    0.5     6.4     0.6     5.9    0.7      4.6     0.9      2.9     3.2    25.8       29.0
Masaka                        0.5      6.7    0.6     7.3     0.8     6.7    0.9      5.3     1.1      3.3     3.9    29.3      33.2
Mbale                         0.6      6.7    0.7     7.2     0.9     6.7    1.1      5.2     1.3      3.2     4.6    29.0       33.7
Mbarara                       1.0      6.2    1.2     6.8     1.4     6.2    1.7      4.9     2.0      3.0     7.2    27.1       34.4
Soroti                        0.6      4.1    0.7     4.4     0.9     4.1    1.1      3.2     1.3      2.0     4.5    17.7       22.2
Sub total Cities              8.5     58.4   10.2    63.4    12.2    58.3   14.7     45.8    17.6    28.3     63.3 254.2       317.5
Municipalities                                                                                                         -          -
Apac                          0.4      1.2    0.4     1.2     0.5     1.2    0.6      0.9     0.8      0.6     2.7     5.1        7.8
Bugiri                        0.3      0.9    0.3     1.0     0.4     0.9    0.5      0.7     0.6      0.5     2.1     4.1        6.2
Bushenyi Ishaka               0.5      1.4    0.6     1.6     0.8     1.4    0.9      1.1     1.1      0.7     4.0     6.3       10.3
Busia                         0.4      1.3    0.5     1.5     0.6     1.3    0.7      1.1     0.8      0.7     3.0     5.9        8.8
Ibanda                        0.4      2.2    0.4     2.4     0.5     2.2    0.6      1.8     0.7      1.1     2.7     9.8       12.5
Iganga                        0.4      1.0    0.5     1.1     0.5     1.0    0.6      0.8     0.8      0.5     2.8     4.6        7.4
Kabale                        0.4      1.5    0.5     1.7     0.6     1.5    0.7      1.2     0.8      0.8     2.9     6.8        9.7
Kamuli                        0.4      1.5    0.5     1.6     0.6     1.5    0.8      1.2     0.9      0.8     3.3     6.6       10.0
Kapchorwa                     0.3      1.3    0.4     1.4     0.5     1.3    0.6      1.0     0.7      0.7     2.5     5.7        8.2
Kasese                        0.4      1.8    0.5     2.0     0.6     1.8    0.8      1.4     0.9      0.9     3.3     8.0       11.3
Kisoro                        0.4      1.4    0.5     1.5     0.6     1.4    0.7      1.1     0.9      0.7     3.1     6.1        9.3
Kitgum                        0.3      1.1    0.4     1.2     0.5     1.1    0.6      0.9     0.7      0.6     2.4     5.0        7.5
Koboko                        0.4      1.4    0.4     1.5     0.5     1.4    0.6      1.1     0.8      0.7     2.7     6.1        8.8
Kotido                        0.3      1.2    0.4     1.3     0.4     1.2    0.5      1.0     0.6      0.6     2.2     5.3        7.5
Kumi                          0.3      1.0    0.4     1.1     0.5     1.0    0.6      0.8     0.7      0.5     2.6     4.5        7.1
Lugazi                        0.4      1.8    0.5     2.0     0.6     1.8    0.7      1.4     0.8      0.9     3.0     8.0       11.0
Masindi                       0.4      1.8    0.5     1.9     0.6     1.8    0.7      1.4     0.9      0.9     3.1     7.9       11.0
Mityana                       0.4      2.2    0.4     2.4     0.5     2.2    0.6      1.7     0.7      1.1     2.6     9.5       12.1
Moroto                        0.3      0.7    0.4     0.8     0.4     0.7    0.5      0.6     0.6      0.4     2.2     3.2        5.4
Mubende                       0.5      2.0    0.6     2.2     0.7     2.0    0.9      1.6     1.1      1.0     3.9     8.8       12.6
Nebi                          0.4      1.2    0.4     1.2     0.5     1.2    0.6      0.9     0.8      0.6     2.8     5.1        7.8
Njeru                         0.4      3.2    0.5     3.4     0.6     3.2    0.7      2.5     0.9      1.5     3.2    13.8       17.0
Ntungamo                      0.1      0.8    0.2     0.8     0.2     0.8    0.2      0.6     0.3      0.4     1.0     3.4        4.4
Rukungiri                     0.2      1.1    0.2     1.2     0.2     1.1    0.3      0.8     0.3      0.5     1.1     4.7        5.9
Shema                         0.4      1.8    0.5     2.0     0.6     1.8    0.7      1.4     0.8      0.9     3.0     7.9       10.9
Tororo                        0.4      1.1    0.5     1.2     0.6     1.1    0.7      0.8     0.9      0.5     3.1     4.7        7.8
Sub total for Municipalities  9.6     38.1   11.5    41.2    13.8    38.0   16.6     30.1   19.9     19.2     71.4 166.7       238.0
Districts                                                                                                              -          -
Adjuman                       0.4      0.7    0.4     1.2     0.5     1.1    0.6      0.9     0.8      0.6     2.7     4.6        7.2
Arua                          0.4      0.6    0.5     1.1     0.6     1.0    0.7      0.8     0.8      0.5     2.9     4.2        7.1
Isingiro                      0.5      1.4    0.6     2.5     0.7     2.2    0.9      1.8     1.1      1.1     3.8     9.1      12.9
Kamwenge                      0.4      0.9    0.5     1.6     0.6     1.5    0.7      1.2     0.8      0.7     2.9     6.0        8.9
Kikuube                       0.4      0.9    0.5     1.7     0.6     1.5    0.7      1.2     0.8      0.8     3.0     6.1        9.1
Kirandongo                    0.4      1.0    0.5     1.8     0.6     1.6    0.7      1.3     0.9      0.8     3.1     6.5        9.6
Kyegegwa                      0.4      1.1    0.4     2.1     0.5     1.9    0.6      1.5     0.8      0.9     2.8     7.5       10.3
Lamwo                         0.5      0.7    0.6     1.2     0.7     1.1    0.9      0.9     1.0      0.6     3.7     4.4        8.1
Madi-Okollo                   0.3      0.6    0.4     1.1     0.5     1.0    0.6      0.8     0.7      0.5     2.4     4.1        6.6
Moyo                          0.4      0.5    0.5     0.9     0.6     0.9    0.7      0.7     0.9      0.4     3.2     3.5        6.7
Obongi                        0.4      0.5    0.4     0.8     0.5     0.7    0.6      0.6     0.8      0.4     2.7     3.0        5.8
Terego                        0.4      0.8    0.5     1.4     0.6     1.3    0.7      1.0     0.8      0.7     3.0     5.2        8.2
Yumbe                         0.7      2.0    0.8     3.6     1.0     3.2    1.2      2.6     1.4      1.6     5.0    13.0       17.9
Sub total Districts           5.5     11.8    6.6    21.2     8.0    19.0    9.6     15.5    11.5      9.6    41.2    77.2     118.3
Grand Total                  25.0    111.3   30.1 128.8      36.1 118.4     43.3     94.3    51.9    60.1    186.4 513.1       699.4




                                                                                                                                                   65


                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Annex 4: ISG eligible and non-eligible expenditure

       A.     ELIGIBLE EXPENDITURES
  No        Functional area                   Indicative expenditure areas
   1        Urban planning & services         • Spatial planning activities
                                              • GIS mapping instruments
                                              • Investment planning improvements
                                              • Enforcement and implementation
  2         Urban economic development        • Mapping of economic activities and private sector actors
            and competitiveness               • Surveys of local business environment
                                              • Consultative meetings with private sector
  3         Own Source Revenue (OSR)          • Development of revenue databases
            improvements                      • Development of modernized billing systems
                                              • Street and property addressing
                                              • Property valuation updates
                                              • Enforcement and implementation
  4         Asset management                  • Asset mapping and inventories
  5         Urban resilience, key             • Climate change impact assessment
            biodiversity area (hope spots),   • Key biodiversity areas (hope spots)
            and climate change/disaster       • Disaster risk assessment
            risk management                   • Risk map
                                              • Emergency response plan
  6         Environmental and social          • Support to functionality of District/Urban Environment and natural resource
            Management                             committee
                                              • Environmental and Social assessments,
                                              • Stakeholder Engagements and GRM, GBV/SEA/SH
                                              • Environmental compliance Audits,
                                              • Health and Safety in infrastructural development
                                              • Gender mainstreaming,
                                              • Capacity building for enhanced E&S risk management in infrastructural
                                                   development e.g., costing ESMP, E&S in designs, B.O.Q, ESHS in bidding &
                                                   contractual development of bylaws and ordinance
  7         E-government services             • Participation and communication services (e-platform)
                                              • Integrated services (e.g., one-stop services and portals)
                                              • Electronic Government Procurement(eGP)
  8         Human resource development        • Training in the above areas (short courses not exceeding 9 months)
  9         Retooling                         • Office furniture
                                              • Office renovation (painting, tiling, etc.)
                                              • Internet connectivity
                                              • Specialized equipment and tools (surveying, air quality, other environmental
                                                   monitoring equipment, weather station etc.)
        B. NON-ELIGIBLE EXPENDITURES
  a      Means of transport (vehicles, motorcycles)
  b      Construction of office building
  c      International travel and associated costs
  d      Long term training costs (for example, university degree programs)
  e      Recurrent costs (for example, salaries, utilities, and the like)




                                                                                                                               66


                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       Annex 5: Refugee and Host Community Population

       #       District                          Settlement                 Host               Refugee             %age
                                                                            population         Population

       1.      Isingiro                          Nakivale/Oruchinga         635,077            283,413             31%

       2.      Madi-Okollo
                                                 Rhinocamp 31/Imvepi        501,304            276,080             36%
       3.      Terego

       4.      Adjumani                          Adjumani                   300,590            233,407             44%

       5.      Yumbe                             Bidibidi                   945,100            209,265             18%

       6.      Kiryandongo                       Kiryandongo                760,372            165,463             18%

       7.      Kikuube                           Kyangwali                  379,547            154,857             29%

       8.      Obongi                            Palorinya                  142,983            142,254             50%

       9.      Kyegegwa                          Kyaka II                   501,120            137,615             22%

      10.      Kamwenge                          Rwamwanja                  337,167            106,260             24%

      11.      Lamwo                             Palabek                    213,156            95,005              31%

Source: Government, Office of the Prime Minister, UNHCR: https://data.unhcr.org/en/country/uga
       (Host population as of March 31, 2025 while Refugee Population as of November 30, 2025)




31
     Madi-Okollo and Terego are two districts which share Rhinocamp refugee settlement and hence the combined refugee population.

                                                                                                                               67


                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
Annex 6: Government of Uganda Refugee Response Strategy




                                                                     68


                                                          Official Use Only
           69


Official Use Only
           70


Official Use Only
           71


Official Use Only
           72


Official Use Only
           73


Official Use Only
           74


Official Use Only
           75


Official Use Only
           76


Official Use Only
