Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 10/14/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04521




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 21, 2025                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P511489                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      Peru Tourism                 2026

                     Operation Name            STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Peru                      Peru                                    LATIN AMERICA AND            Finance, Competitiveness
                                                                                       CARIBBEAN                    and Innovation

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Economy       Regional Government of Arequipa         06-Oct-2025                  09-Dec-2025
                     and Finance

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     01-Oct-2025               94,800,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The PDO is to improve the quality of tourism infrastructure and services, enhance the conditions of natural and cultural
                     heritage sites, and increase sustainable tourism activity in the Arequipa region of Peru.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     This project is a pilot to unlock tourism development at the regional level through multi-sector interventions. The
                     project is designed to address the multifaceted challenges and opportunities for tourism in Arequipa through
                     coordinated multisectoral investments aiming at identified gaps in connectivity, public services and tourism amenities
                     and sites. The project recognizes that effective tourism development requires a holistic approach that integrates
                     infrastructure improvements, cultural heritage preservation, and effective destination management and promotion. The
                     project focuses on developing tourism routes between the city of Arequipa and the Colca Valley (in the Arequipa region)
                     through the following four complementary components: Component 1. Improving the quality of selected tourist

                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                     attractions : 1.1) Develop and improve services in targeted sites and attractions and 1.2) Rehabilitate cultural sites
                     Component 2. Upgrading roads and investing in water, sanitation and health facilities focusing on : 2.1) Upgrading the
                     quality of key roads along the identified tourism routes, and 2.2) Improving the water and sewage systems in towns on
                     the identified tourist routes 2.3) construction of a health center and forest rehabilitation. Component 3. Institutional
                     strengthening. Component 4. Project implementation.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project will be carried out in Peru’s southern Arequipa region, targeting peri-urban and rural areas along the
                     Arequipa–Colca corridor. Priority districts include Yura, San Juan de Tarucani, and several highland towns in the Colca
                     Valley (e.g., Chivay, Yanque, Sibayo, Maca, Lari, and Pinchollo). All project sites were pre-identified through regionally
                     based planning processes and include both consolidated urban neighborhoods and remote highland communities. Some
                     interventions are located within or near environmentally and culturally sensitive areas, including the Salinas and Aguada
                     Blanca National Reserve (SABNR), high Andean wetlands, queñua forests, and a series of archaeological and colonial
                     heritage sites. Project activities aim to improve tourism-related infrastructure, regional connectivity, and basic services,
                     while strengthening institutional coordination and public service delivery.

                     The project area is characterized by complex ecological and cultural settings. The SABNR, established in 1979 and
                     covering 366,936 hectares, safeguards puna grasslands, high-Andean wetlands (bofedales), tolares, queñua forests
                     (Polylepis), and lagoons, including two Ramsar sites. These ecosystems provide critical water resources for the city of
                     Arequipa and are home to emblematic species such as vicuña, guanaco, taruca, and Andean flamingos. The region also



Public Disclosure
                     overlaps with the UNESCO Global Geopark “Colca Canyon and Valley of the Volcanoes of Andagua,” recognized in 2019
                     for its outstanding geodiversity and cultural heritage. The geopark encompasses 21 districts across Caylloma and Castilla
                     provinces, where Collagua and Cabana communities maintain ancestral productive traditions such as pre-Columbian
                     agricultural terraces, colonial churches, and vibrant cultural practices. In Maca, a district of the Colca Valley, ongoing
                     geological instability and recurrent landslides—exacerbated by seismic activity—pose high-level risks to infrastructure,
                     cultural heritage, and local livelihoods. Despite prior relocation efforts, many residents have returned to high-risk zones,
                     underscoring the social complexity of disaster risk management.

                     The Arequipa region presents significant territorial disparities. While the regional poverty rate is 19.3 percent (INEI,
                     2023), it exceeds 35 percent in Caylloma province, where many project investments will be concentrated. Informality
                     remains high, affecting 73 percent of the regional workforce (ENAHO, 2022), particularly in rural areas. Structural
                     inequalities are reflected in limited access to basic services such as potable water, sanitation, and health, especially in
                     highland districts targeted by the project. According to the 2017 National Census, approximately 35 percent of
                     Caylloma’s population reported Quechua as their mother tongue, compared to 20 percent Quechua at the regional
                     level. Illiteracy rates exceed 10 percent among older women in remote areas, and seasonal migration of young people
                     to Arequipa city for temporary employment creates fragmented households and economic dependence on remittances.

                     The project area includes multiple recognized small farmer communities (“comunidades campesinas”), many of which
                     consist of Quechua indigenous people. These communities maintain cultural practices strongly tied to the collective
                     management of their territories and natural resources. Subprojects are expected in communities such as Cabanaconde,
                     Maca, Lari, Yanque, Tapay, Ichupampa, Chivay, Coporaque, Achoma, Salinas, San Juan de Tarucani, Characato, Polobaya,


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                     and Pampa de Los Arrieros, among others. These populations are both central to project benefits—through tourism,
                     cultural heritage, and improved services—and potentially vulnerable to project risks if engagement is not inclusive.

                     Social tensions are also present in the project influence area. In the Colca Valley, the Autoridad Autónoma del Colca y
                     Anexos (AUTOCOLCA) manages visitor entrance fees, but community members have expressed concerns that revenues
                     are not equitably reinvested in local services, infrastructure, or site maintenance. Protests in Chivay and Yanque in
                     recent years have reflected these grievances. These dynamics underscore the need for transparent benefit-sharing,
                     culturally appropriate consultation, and inclusive participation to mitigate social conflict and strengthen community
                     trust.

                     The Regional Government (GORE) of Arequipa maintains a permanent presence in the area and has worked in
                     coordination with municipalities and communities during project preparation through its Regional Management of
                     Foreign Trade, Tourism, and Handicrafts (GERCETUR).

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project will be implemented by the Regional Government of Arequipa (GORE). GORE has prior experience executing
                     infrastructure projects at the regional level, including roads, water supply and sanitation systems, health centers, and
                     tourism facilities, but has no prior experience managing World Bank–financed operations or applying the Environmental
                     and Social Framework (ESF). Its institutional capacity to manage environmental and social risks in line with the ESF is
                     limited and is likely to require continuous support during the implementation phase.




Public Disclosure
                     Currently the GORE has environmental and social management areas but lacks an established and extended in-house
                     environmental and social team and the procedures needed to integrate these functions into its operations. The
                     Environmental and Social (E&S) Report prepared for the Project highlights the complexity of managing risks and
                     impacts, given that the 33 subprojects span six sectors—tourism, culture, transport, health, sanitation, and
                     environment—and that many of them located within or near comunidades campesinas. Other subprojects are located
                     in environmentally and socially sensitive areas, such as the Salinas and Aguada Blanca National Reserve and the
                     geologically unstable district of Maca, and will demand specialized risk management approaches and coordination with
                     national technical agencies such as the National Service of Natural Protected Areas (SERNANP) and the Geological,
                     Mining and Metallurgical Institute (INGEMMET). The inclusion of colonial churches and archaeological sites—such as the
                     Chimpa Fortress and the Uyo Uyo archeological complex—among the investments further requires close coordination
                     with the Ministry of Culture, to ensure the proper management of cultural heritage.

                     Although GORE maintains a permanent on-the-ground presence and has engaged stakeholders during project
                     preparation through GERCETUR, its technical capacity remains weak in key areas such as stakeholder engagement, labor
                     management, cultural heritage, environmental and social monitoring and reporting, and grievance redress. In the Colca
                     Valley, the Autonomous Authority of Colca (AUTOCOLCA) plays a critical role in tourism promotion and management,
                     but coordination between this authority and other GORE departments has proven fragmented and requires significant
                     strengthening. For implementation, a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established within GORE, with overall
                     responsibility for environmental and social risk management. The PIU will need to coordinate systematically with
                     national entities, including the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism (MINCETUR), the Ministry of Culture (MINCUL),
                     the National Service of Natural Protected Areas (SERNANP), the Ministry of Environment (MINAM),the Local Water
                     Authorities (ALA) from Colca-Siguas and Chili, the Geological, Mining and Metallurgical Institute (INGEMMET), the


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                     Ministry of Housing, Construction and Sanitation (MVCS), and the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MTC),
                     with provincial and district municipal authorities, with AUTOCOLCA, and with local communities. This coordination will
                     ensure continuous dialogue with key stakeholders and the timely preparation of site-level instruments such as
                     Indigenous peoples Plans, Resettlement Plans, and site-specific ESMPs.
                     In light of these capacity gaps, enhanced staffing, specialized training, and systematic coordination protocols will be
                     required. The up-front support provided through the Grant Facility for Project Preparation (GFPP) has already identified
                     the need to appoint permanent environmental, social, OHS, and communications specialists to the PIU, to provide
                     targeted training on ESF application, cultural heritage management, and grievances handling, and to establish reliable
                     monitoring and reporting systems. These capacity-building measures will be referenced in the Environmental and Social
                     Commitment Plan (ESCP) and financed under Component 4 of the Project.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating is Substantial. The main adverse risks and impacts are associated with the development
                     and improvement of services at the tourism sites and rehabilitation of cultural sites (historic churches and temples)
                     (C1) and investments in roads, water supply and sanitation, health facilities, and protecting ecosystem services (C2).
                     The Project poses E&S risks and impacts—especially during i) works of existing road rehabilitation, ii) demolition of



Public Disclosure
                     the existing health clinic and construction of a larger clinic, iii) improvements to the drinking water supply and
                     distribution systems, sewage systems, and wastewater treatment and iv) tourism investments that include a mix of
                     access roads, visitor/interpretation centers, parking, trails, signage, museography, viewpoints, and control booths.
                     These include civil works involving earthworks, drainage infrastructure (culverts, longitudinal drains), pavement
                     laying, and the use of ancillary facilities (e.g. quarries, surplus material deposits and camps). The risks and potential
                     impacts of the Project during its construction stage are associated with: (i) noise, vibration, dust nuisance, and visual
                     disturbances; (ii) waste management, including hazardous waste; (iii) traffic management issues that may disturb
                     communities and increase accident risks due to increased vehicular traffic; (iv) contamination of water bodies due to
                     spills or discharges; (v) inadequate impacts management in the project’s auxiliary areas; (vi) occupational health and
                     safety (OHS) risks to workers and (vii) disturbance to biodiversity in protected or ecologically sensitive areas such as
                     wetlands and high Andean forests, including the SABNR. These environmental, health, and safety risks, as well as the
                     identified adverse impacts, are expected to be predictable, temporary, and site-specific, for which known and reliable
                     mitigation measures exist. Road improvement subprojects may require works beyond established rights-of-way,
                     which would entail the possible removal of trees, shrubs, and other vegetation, as well as affecting agricultural
                     activities. During the operational stage, potential risks associated with the Project include i) increased traffic on
                     rehabilitated roads, which may pose risks to community safety; ii) potential water/wastewaster pipeline breaks; iii)
                     generation of effluent and sludge due to the operation of the Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP); iv) impacts on
                     water consumption, waste and wastewater generation, and v) energy demand due to increased tourist activity.
                     Although three subprojects—focused on water supply and sanitation, tourism, and transport—intersect with the
                     SABNR, and seven additional subprojects are located within its buffer zone, only one is expected to pose a significant
                     risk: the intervention at the existing Tarucani WWTP within the SABNR. In parallel, an active geological hazard—the


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                     Maca landslide—presents a threat to the safety of residents in the Maca district, where water supply and sanitation
                     works are planned. This geological risk scenario, along with its associated social and legal implications, need to be
                     further assessed. The recommendations of this analysis will be considered key input for the final engineering design
                     and will include specific measures in the PGAS for the subproject.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is Substantial at this stage due to the complexity and sensitivity of the proposed operation,
                     whose risks and potential impacts remain manageable with proper mitigation. The Project will finance 33 subprojects
                     across six sectors—tourism, transport, sanitation, health, environment, and culture—spread throughout the
                     Arequipa-Colca corridor. The intervention area is characterized by poverty, high informality, and the presence of
                     campesino and indigenous communities, particularly in the Colca Valley. While the subprojects are expected to
                     generate positive local benefits, including employment opportunities and increased tourism flows, they also carry
                     risks of temporary economic displacement for informal vendors, artisans, and small businesses, as well as potential
                     restrictions on communal land use. No involuntary physical displacement or resettlement is anticipated, formalizing
                     this through an Exclusion List, which will be presented in the Program's Operations Manual (POM). Potential impacts
                     have been identified, such as small-scale land acquisition, restrictions on the use of communal or public lands, and
                     temporary economic displacement. The UEP/GORE shall prepare the Livelihoods Restoration Plan (LRP) for these
                     cases. Beyond these direct risks, there are broader challenges linked to governance and community-level
                     expectations. Persistent community concerns regarding inequities in the distribution of tourism revenues, particularly
                     in relation to the Autonomous Authority of Colca (AUTOCOLCA), highlight tensions that could be exacerbated if not
                     addressed transparently. Tourism in the Colca Valley is managed through the “Boleto Turístico,” established by




Public Disclosure
                     AUTOCOLCA under Laws No. 24521 and No. 28537. The ticket costs S/. 70 (approximately USD 19) per visitor and is
                     intended to preserve and promote the natural, cultural, and architectural heritage of the Colca Canyon, the Salinas
                     and Aguada Blanca Reserve, and the Valley of the Volcanoes. However, both communities and tourists have
                     expressed dissatisfaction with this fee, citing the poor condition of some sites and limited dialogue between
                     AUTOCOLCA and local communities. The Maca landslide, situated within the territory of the Maca rural community in
                     Maca district, represents a significant geological hazard and is categorized as a “Very High Danger” by the competent
                     technical authorities (INGEMMET and IGP, the Geophysical Institute of Peru) for community members and their
                     surrounding infrastructure. This phenomenon is an active and complex process, which is driven by a combination of
                     geological, hydrological, and seismic factors. The risks associated with this geological hazard to the subprojects that
                     will be implemented in its vicinity, as well as the actions to be taken, are described in section A.1 and are further
                     detailed in ESS4. The project may also raise expectations for employment, benefit sharing, and recognition of
                     community rights, which, if unmet, could lead to social conflict. Cultural sensitivities add another layer of complexity,
                     as interventions include colonial churches and heritage sites, requiring culturally appropriate engagement to avoid
                     alienation or resistance from local communities. Additional risks include the exclusion of vulnerable groups such as
                     women, youth, and internal migrants from project benefits, insufficient or culturally inappropriate consultation
                     processes, weak institutional capacity to manage labor and community relations, and limited grievance redress
                     systems. While a grievance mechanism is being established under the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), the GORE
                     has demonstrated certain limitations in managing complaints effectively, and building trust in such systems will a
                     require sustained effort.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                      Relevant

                      The Borrower has concluded a draft Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) Report, which includes E&S risks and
                      impacts matrices for each of the six sectors covered by the 33 subprojects. Given that the subprojects are at different
                      stages of development—including 14 in the idea phase, 17 in the profile phase, and 2 in the detailed design phase—
                      the current available information for each intervention varies significantly. Therefore, the ESA Report provides a
                      general baseline assessment of the area in which subprojects will be located and discusses the potential risks and
                      impacts that may arise depending of the scope of works per sector. Among the most significant findings are the
                      presence of sensitive ecosystems within the Salinas and Aguada Blanca National Reserve (SABNR), the Colca Canyon
                      and Andagua Volcanoes Valley Geopark, geodynamic vulnerability in the Maca area, the Maca’s landslide area, and
                      intervention in lands of the rural communities recognized as Quechua indigenous peoples in the project's area of
                      influence. The main risks (as mentioned in section A.1) are associated with the construction of the wastewater
                      treatment plant (WWTP) and other civil works that could alter biodiversity and sensitive ecosystems, with a
                      substantial risk of impact on the conservation elements of flora and fauna within the SABNR and especially in wetland
                      areas. Moderate risks are also reported in relation to community safety due to natural events such as earthquakes
                      and the geological phenomenon in the district of Maca, and moderate risks to cultural heritage due to interventions
                      in sites and churches that form part of the nation's cultural heritage. Risks related to the impact on cultural practices
                      and access to resources are identified, considering that most of the subprojects are carried out in rural communities.
                      There is a risk of non-compliance with the principle of equal opportunity and non-discrimination in contracting civil
                      construction workers due to Regional Ordinance N° 283-AREQUIPA, whose arbitrary application in the past has led to



Public Disclosure
                      the concentration of hiring in certain labor unions, to the exclusion of others. The ESA Report describes mitigation
                      measures to address the risks and identifies the corresponding management plans planned for project
                      implementation. According to current national regulations, subprojects in tourism, transportation, water and
                      sanitation, and health sectors will require an environmental and social management instrument, and subprojects in
                      the culture and environment sectors must consult with the environmental authority to determine whether the
                      development of an environmental and social management instrument is required. Specific ESMPs will be developed
                      for each subproject, addressing the gaps identified between Peruvian regulations and the requirements of the
                      relevant ESS, which are related to: associated facilities, cumulative impact assessment, labor management, grievance
                      and complaint procedures, energy efficiency, stakeholder engagement, emergency preparedness and response, and
                      indigenous peoples. ESMPs will be prepared based on the E&S risks and impacts matrices and a template developed
                      during project preparation. The template was prepared considering compliance with the relevant ESS requirements
                      and includes: (i) identification and assessment of associated facilities; (ii) E&S baseline data; (iii) guidance for selection
                      of material sites to avoid proximity to protected areas; (iv) E&S impact analysis and mitigation measures related to
                      the intervention and associated facilities; (v) measures for addressing existing environmental liabilities; and (vi) the
                      establishment of worker camps, among others. The ESCP will require that ESMPs will be developed by the PIU for
                      each subproject and that these be finalized and disclosed prior to the respective bidding process for the works.
                      During Project implementation, contractors will develop and implement their own C-ESMPs, based on the subproject'
                      ESMP. The C-ESMP will be approved by the PIU before starting construction activities. Capacity strengthening
                      measures for the PIU will be part of the Project’s ESCP. Key measures that the PIU should pay attention to during
                      Project implementation are the timing of staff recruitment, as necessary, and sequencing of Project activities to
                      ensure there is sufficient time for the recruited staff to receive training. Such training will cover the development of
                      the necessary E&S instruments, the efficient transfer of knowledge from the GORE Arequipa staff who prepared the

                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                          Page 7 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                      Project and the transfer of relevant technical information. Technical Assistance (TA) activities envisaged under C3,
                      regarding the capacity building for destination management, include commitments to ensure that the preparation of
                      consulting services, studies, capacity-building tasks, training events, and any other types of TA are acceptable to the
                      Bank, and consistent with the relevant ESS. To manage other E&S risks of the Project, GORE Arequipa developed a
                      draft SEP to establish systematic and culturally appropriate consultations, including bilingual materials, participatory
                      workshops, and meetings with key stakeholders. The preparation of the SEP included interviews and meetings with
                      key stakeholders, as well as a significant consultation process carried out during project preparation. In parallel, Labor
                      Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared to define terms of employment, equal opportunity provisions,
                      occupational health and safety standards, and a grievance mechanism for workers. Site-specific Indigenous peoples
                      Plans will be developed as technical designs are finalized, incorporating data and information necessary to complete
                      the impact assessment for recognized small farmers communities. No involuntary physical displacement or
                      resettlement is anticipated, formalizing this through an Exclusion List. Potential impacts have been identified, such as
                      small-scale land acquisition, restrictions on the use of communal or public lands, and temporary economic
                      displacement, for which Livelihoods Restoration Plan (LRP) will be implemented. During Project preparation the GORE
                      Arequipa also developed an ESCP containing the measures, actions and timeframes required to ensure compliance
                      with each relevant ESS, as well as monitoring and reporting arrangements during Project implementation. The ESCP
                      shall be agreed between the Borrower and the Bank during the negotiations stage.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The affected and other interested parties vary by sub-project and sector but affected parties
                      can be generally mentioned as small farmer communities (comunidades campesinas), villages, and districts (which



Public Disclosure
                      include vulnerable groups such as indigenous peoples, children, women, the elderly, and persons with disabilities), as
                      well as local artisan associations, merchants, tour operators, and transportation providers. Other interested parties
                      include public entities at the national and regional level from the tourism, culture, transport, basic sanitation, water,
                      health, and environment sectors; provincial municipalities; AUTOCOLCA; the Archbishopric of Arequipa; restaurant
                      and hotel associations; travel agencies; NGOs; and academic sectors related to tourism, culture, and the
                      environment, among others. During preparation, the Government of Arequipa (GORE) held a regional consultation
                      workshop that involved the participation of regional authorities, AUTOCOLCA, SERFOR, civil society organizations
                      (artisans, tour operators, and other tourism-related associations), the Archbishopric of Arequipa , vendors and
                      academic institutions. One of the most relevant outcomes of this workshop was the request from all participants to
                      keep all stakeholders permanently informed about the program’s design and progress, to establish multi-stakeholder
                      and inter-sectoral coordination channels for environmental and social management, and to actively involve affected
                      parties for each subproject, especially the Campesino Communities where activities will be carried out. For the
                      tourism sector, participants requested that the seasonality of tourism (high season, low season) and the signaling of
                      locations with native flora and fauna be considered during the preparation and execution of subproject activities. For
                      the culture sector, they expressed interest in having the Archbishopric and the regional culture authority be a part of
                      subproject design and implementation for the rehabilitation of temples. Regarding the basic sanitation sector,
                      participants expressed the need to obtain the rights and licenses from the local water authority and voiced their
                      concern about the execution of subprojects in the Maca landslide zone. For subprojects in the transport sector, they
                      proposed signing inter-institutional agreements for the re-categorization of certain roads to fall under the jurisdiction
                      of the GORE Arequipa. A draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared in line with ESS10
                      requirements, consulted upon during preparation, and will be disclosed in-country and on the World Bank’s external


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                       Page 8 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                      website prior to Appraisal. The SEP identifies affected and interested parties, maps their needs and preferred
                      engagement channels, and establishes procedures for ensuring systematic and inclusive engagement throughout the
                      Project cycle. Its design is proportional to the nature and scope of interventions in peri-urban and rural areas of
                      Arequipa and the Colca Valley, with the fundamental objective of increasing transparency, strengthening
                      accountability, and supporting social sustainability. The SEP includes tailored measures for reaching disadvantaged or
                      vulnerable groups, including indigenous peoples (notably Quechua-speaking smallholder farming communities in
                      Caylloma), women, older persons, youth, and persons with disabilities. Engagement methods combine in-person
                      workshops, community assemblies, and meetings with municipal and regional authorities, with culturally appropriate
                      communication tools such as printed materials, community radio broadcasting in Spanish and Quechua, and graphic
                      formats accessible to low-literacy audiences. Consultations with indigenous peoples and other vulnerable groups
                      located in districts where specific subproject sites have already been identified are documented in the SEP. Strategies
                      for further engagement with these groups during implementation are also outlined, including participatory mapping
                      of interventions and culturally appropriate dialogue processes. The implementation of the SEP will be led by both of
                      the social specialists for the Project to be based in its PIU. They will be responsible for planning and coordinating the
                      execution of the necessary activities to comply with the SEP, designing the messages for information disclosure and
                      the operation of consultation strategies, and monitoring compliance with the World Bank’s ESSs. They will also help
                      identify the need to obtain free, prior, and informed consent (FPIC) for any subproject activities, and take the lead in
                      coordinating the FPIC process on the side of the government. At the local level and for each subproject, the
                      contracting companies must have one or more professionals in community relations and citizen participation (the
                      number will depend on the level of environmental and social risks of the subproject and the size of the areas to be
                      intervened). These professionals must have received prior training and periodic refreshers from the PIU’s social and




Public Disclosure
                      environmental specialists on the ESF and SEP, participatory methodologies, interculturality, and the management of
                      communication and participation strategies for their implementation and compliance and will maintain permanent
                      communication and coordination with the PIU through contractually established mechanisms. Aditionaly and also
                      contractually established, each subproject will have a grievance and information office in its area of influence, located
                      in an easily accessible place and with appropriate service hours for affected parties. This office will be managed by
                      the contractor's community relations area and will be available to the PIU’s social specialists. A project-specific
                      grievance mechanism (GM) has been established as part of the draft SEP to provide accessible, inclusive, and
                      culturally appropriate channels for submitting concerns and complaints free of charge. The GM is designed to cover
                      all phases of the Project and all subcomponents, with multiple entry points: (i) in-person submissions at GERCETUR
                      offices, contractor field offices, and during consultation events; (ii) virtual submissions through the Project’s website
                      and a dedicated email address; (iii) a toll-free phone line operated by the grievance team; and (iv) text messaging and
                      WhatsApp numbers managed by grievance focal points. The mechanism allows for anonymous submissions and
                      guarantees confidentiality, impartiality, and timely resolution, with a two-level escalation system that includes review
                      by a regional multi-institutional committee when necessary. The GM incorporates a dedicated SEA/SH protocol
                      consistent with World Bank good practices, applying a survivor-centered approach with clear referral pathways to
                      health, legal, and psychosocial services. Contractors will be required to designate community liaison staff and
                      maintain grievance logs, feeding into the Project’s central database for monitoring and reporting. For the
                      implementation of the GM, one of the social specialists shall have the role of Grievance Manager. At the local level,
                      for each subproject, the contractor's community relations team must designate a Local Grievance Coordinator, who
                      must be trained and supervised by the PIU’s Grievance Manager to directly address grievances and complaints in the
                      field. This individual must have a permanent presence at the grievance and information office. The GM will eventually
                      include a second-level body, responsible for the review and resolution of cases not resolved at the first level, called


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 9 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                      the Grievance Management Committee. This body will include representation from regional public entities linked to
                      the Project, with the possible participation of the national Ombudsman’s Office (Defensoría del Pueblo). A specific
                      budget line has been established to finance engagement activities, communication materials, capacity-building on
                      intercultural approaches, and the operation of the GM. Monitoring will include both quantitative indicators (e.g.,
                      number of meetings, grievances received and resolved, disaggregated by gender, ethnicity, and age) and make use of
                      qualitative assessments (e.g., satisfaction surveys), to measure the effectiveness of the information disclosure and
                      meaningful consultation strategies designed for each subproject, considering the identified vulnerable groups.
                      Progress reports will be shared with stakeholders through the same channels used for consultations, reinforcing
                      transparency and accountability. The SEP will be updated and re-disclosed during implementation as needed.
                      Implementation of the SEP and GM is included in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), with
                      performance subject to regular monitoring by GORE and supervision by the Bank.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                  Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The project will engage several categories of workers: (i) direct workers, including staff from
                      the Government of Arequipa (GORE) and the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), as well as relevant national
                      counterparts in MINCETUR and other ministries; (ii) contracted workers, including for construction firms, service
                      providers, and supervision companies responsible for road rehabilitation, water and sanitation facilities, health posts,
                      and the restoration of cultural heritage and religious buildings; and (iii) consultants and technical assistance providers
                      supporting project design, management, monitoring, and institutional strengthening. The potential involvement of
                      community workers, particularly local residents temporarily engaged in minor works, site cleaning, or community-
                      based tourism services, has been identified in the E&S risks and impacts matrices and will be managed under



Public Disclosure
                      procedures consistent with ESS2. Regional Ordinance N° 283-AREQUIPA has been used to allocate civil construction
                      jobs (for both skilled and unskilled laborers) between Arequipa’s civil construction unions and GORE Arequipa. This
                      has resulted in: i) prioritization of one union over others due to past experiences of conflict and work stoppages, and
                      ii) reduced employment opportunities for local populations not affiliated with unions. Because of the possibility of
                      non-compliance with the principle of equal opportunity and non-discrimination in ESS2, this practice will require
                      further analysis, and possibly the specification of mitigation measures. The use of primary supply workers, for
                      example through the sourcing of construction materials from local quarries or suppliers, is also anticipated and will
                      also be managed accordingly. The E&S risks and impacts matrices identified key OHS hazards: (i) physical risks from
                      construction and restoration works, such as falls, cuts, collapses, electrocution, and exposure to high noise and
                      vibration; (ii) risks associated with working at high altitude in Caylloma and other rural districts; (iii) structural risks in
                      deteriorating buildings, particularly churches damaged by past earthquakes; (iv) exposure to dust, silica, and
                      chemicals during road rehabilitation and quarrying activities; (v) biological hazards linked to handling wastewater and
                      sanitation facilities, including exposure to pathogens and vectors; and (vi) traffic and road safety risks from heavy
                      machinery and increased vehicle circulation in small towns and rural areas. To address these risks, Labor
                      Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared in accordance with ESS2, adopted as binding for the Project, and
                      disclosed within 60 days after the Effectiveness Date. Thereafter, they will be implemented throughout the execution
                      of the subprojects. The LMP document will be tailored to the project’s characteristics (e.g., infrastructure
                      construction in peri-urban and rural areas, hiring of local labor, restoration of patrimonial buildings, and exposure to
                      hazardous substances and materials). It will summarize the applicable labor legislation, including Regional Ordinance
                      N° 283-AREQUIPA at the regional level, and not only analyze how it has been applied, but also how it aligns with
                      international labor treaties ratified by the Peruvian state and ESS2 provisions. The LMP specifies measures to protect


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                           Page 10 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                      workers, ensure fulfillment of their rights and benefits, require that contracts are issued in writing, reinforce
                      prohibitions on forced and child labor, and establish procedures to prevent and address sexual harassment, sexual
                      exploitation, and abuse. It also defines measures for occupational health and safety (OHS), including site-specific OHS
                      plans, emergency preparedness, and regular training; and requires contractors to adopt and enforce Codes of
                      Conduct applicable to all Project workers. Labor influx risks are also expected, particularly in smaller municipalities
                      and indigenous communities. The LMP requires contractors to prioritize local hiring where feasible, adopt transparent
                      recruitment processes, and implement measures to mitigate risks of social tension, discrimination, and SEA/SH. All
                      contractors and subcontractors will adopt Codes with clauses on respectful behavior, non-discrimination, and zero
                      tolerance for GBV. A grievance mechanism specifically for project workers will be adopted and communicated at the
                      time of their induction. Incorporating measures to protect workers from reprisals and ensure confidentiality, the
                      worker GM will be accessible to all categories of workers and address concerns promptly and transparently through
                      multiple channels: in-person submissions at PIU or contractor offices and worksites, a toll-free phone line, email, and
                      written submissions. Workers will receive information on their rights, OHS requirements, their Codes of Conduct, and
                      the worker GM in Spanish and, where relevant, Quechua or other local languages, using culturally appropriate
                      formats (e.g., graphic materials for low-literacy audiences). Special attention will be given to ensuring that women
                      workers and other vulnerable groups understand their rights and protections. The PIU will designate an OHS
                      Specialist to oversee LMP implementation and monitor contractor performance. Contractors will designate labor and
                      community liaison officers at each site. Monitoring will include reporting on working conditions, OHS incidents, and
                      grievance resolution, with data disaggregated by gender, ethnicity, age, and worker category. Implementation of the
                      LMP is included in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and will be subject to regular monitoring by
                      the PIU and supervision by the World Bank.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      The subprojects activities, notably those that involve the rehabilitation/paving of roads, tourism infrastructure
                      investments, demolition of the existing health clinic and construction of a new clinic and improvements to the
                      drinking water supply and distribution systems, sewage systems, and wastewater treatment, have potential to
                      generate pollution to air, water, and land, and consume finite resources. The construction works and ancillary
                      facilities (e.g. construction camps, machinery yards, storage of materials, surplus material storage and quarries)
                      include the generation and disposal of construction wastes; water pollution from construction runoff, wastewater
                      from construction sites and land or ground water contamination; soil and air pollution; noise, dust emissions and land
                      degradation from earth movement and exploration of quarries, and risk of hazard materials contamination. The ESA
                      includes guidance for siting the ancillary facilities to minimize potential impacts. The rehabilitation of roads also
                      demand the use of soil, aggregates, cement, water, and asphalt used in the pavement. The interventions designs will
                      incorporate good international industry practices, including WBG General EHS Guidelines, to reduce discharge and
                      waste and is not expected to significantly impact air pollution, noise, or other forms of pollution. It is not likely that
                      the Project will be a large generator of hazardous materials; nevertheless, the ESMPs will include measures to ensure
                      minimization of adverse impacts on human health and the environment including proper storage, handling, use, and
                      disposal of hazardous, flammable or potentially contaminating wastes such asphalt. One of the subproject’s water
                      supply and sanitation will focus on expanding Tarucani’s wastewater treatment plant, whose effluents are currently
                      discharged directly into the soil. The ESMP will include estimates of the quantity, quality, use, and final disposal of
                      effluent and sludge during WWTP O&M, as well as specific measures to prevent groundwater and soil contamination.
                      In addition, the ESMP will define treatment and final disposal sites, technologies, and infrastructure, as well as the


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 11 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                      environmental and social requirements of local regulations and the instruments necessary to comply with the World
                      Bank's ESS, as established in the ESCP. Efficient use of resources: All construction material needed for the
                      infrastructure work (sand, stones, timber, etc.) will be obtained from licensed quarries and certified suppliers. The
                      siting of construction activities and temporary facilities for the execution of the works in or close to ecologically
                      sensitive areas could lead to some adverse impacts; therefore, the PIU will ensure that specific and stringent
                      measures are included in the relevant C-ESMPs. The ESMPs will also include an analysis of the increase in water
                      consumption, waste and wastewater generation, and energy demand resulting from increased tourism and will
                      establish specific, measurable, and implementable measures related to energy efficiency and pollution management
                      applicable to the operational stages of the subprojects. The project will consider construction specifications that
                      demonstrate savings in terms of energy and water consumption, aiming to enhance natural resource-use efficiency
                      and reduce GHG emissions. In line with ESS3, the ESMPs will document how the use of renewable energy and energy
                      efficiency are addressed in the subproject activities. Waste management: Construction waste will include mostly
                      waste from excavated soil and debris and hazardous waste such as hydrocarbon oils from unplanned maintenance
                      activities of construction machinery and vehicles. Any waste generated by Project activities will be disposed of
                      according to national regulations, GIIP and the WBG’s General EHS Guidelines. The reuse of materials (such as stones,
                      earth, concrete, asphalt) should be promoted whenever technically feasible. If special handling and disposal of
                      materials and waste is required, the ESMP will include measures for the management of hazardous material. Under
                      the environment sector subproject, the use of pesticides or herbicides should be indicated, as well as the Integrated
                      Pest Management (IPM) measures to be adopted. When the use of pesticides or herbicides is justified, an analysis of
                      potential negative impacts resulting from the use of these chemicals and the risks associated with the inappropriate
                      handling or storing of their containers will be conducted, in line with GIIP and local legislation.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      The project will pose health and safety risks to the communities in its area of influence, mainly, due to the
                      construction works under subprojects, which include rehabilitation and paving roads, works on drinking water supply
                      and distribution systems, sewage and wastewater treatment, the construction of tourist infrastructure and the
                      demolition and construction of health clinic. These pose potential safety risks to workers, users and nearby
                      communities, as there will be temporary interruptions of vehicle and pedestrian traffic and/or services, traffic of
                      heavy machinery, as well as risks related to air pollution, noise, vibrations, unsafe construction work/practices. During
                      the operational phase of the project, there will be risks related to accidents involving third parties due to the
                      increased volume of vehicles resulting from road rehabilitation and increased tourism. Potential risks and their
                      respective mitigation measures have been identified in the E&S risks and impacts matrices, which include, among
                      others: the design and dissemination of a Code of Ethics and Conduct, the implementation of road safety measures,
                      the proper implementation of safety measures on construction fronts, such as barriers and fences to avoid to third
                      parties, the development and application of a Traffic Management Plan for all users, including measures related to
                      signaling, the installation of detours as necessary, location of sensitive areas (schools, populated areas and
                      livestock/wildlife transit areas, etc.) and communication measures that will provide clear and timely information.
                      These measures will be incorporated in detail into the subproject ESMPs, tailored to the context of each intervention
                      area and scope of works. In addition, the design and operation of project interventions will incorporate universal
                      accessibility measures to ensure safe and inclusive access for people with disabilities, and will include specific
                      considerations for vulnerable groups in the area of influence. Furthermore, according to ESCP, all contractors must
                      complete a C-ESMP including the requirements to identify all the impacts, the interventions for universal accessibility


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                      measures as well as a set of management programs such as traffic control management plan, OHS risk prevention
                      plan, emergency response plan, among other measures and programs to avoid or mitigate these impacts following
                      local regulatory requirements, as well as World Bank EHS Guidelines. The Project also present impacts and risks
                      related to natural hazards such as mass movements and other geological hazards, which may be triggered by
                      earthquakes. The Geological, Mining and Metallurgical Institute (INGEMMET), as a technical-scientific entity, has
                      classified the Maca landslide area as a critical zone of “Very High Danger” for the occurrence of mass movements
                      (Technical Reports A6741-2017 and A7441-2022). Likewise, the regional executive resolution (RER 387-2018-GRA-GR)
                      specifies that three distinct risk zones have been identified in the district of Maca: urban zone “A”, declared to be
                      very high risk; rural zone “B”, considered high risk; and zone “C”, classified as medium risk. Zones “A” and “B” have
                      been recognized as non-mitigable in the event of seismic, volcanic, and landslide phenomena, while zone “C” is
                      considered suitable for continued habitation and the development of community projects. Peruvian regulations, such
                      as the Law on Population Resettlement, establish Very High Non-Mitigable Risk Areas as intangible and uninhabitable,
                      prohibiting the granting of land titles and the provision of public services, which supports the need for relocation.
                      Considering that the water and sanitation subproject in the district of Maca is currently in the early development
                      stage (idea phase), its preliminary feasibility will be discussed and assessed during the subproject formulation and
                      evaluation , in coordination with INGEMMET and GORE Arequipa. This evaluation will take into account the geological
                      risk scenario, along with its associated social and legal implications. In contrast, the Maca–Lari road transport
                      subproject extends beyond the boundaries of the Maca district and may also pose significant risks associated with
                      geodynamic phenomena. Currently in the feasibility stage, this subproject will undergo detailed technical studies and
                      a comprehensive risk and hazard assessment. Appropriate management measures will be agreed upon with the Bank
                      as part of the preparation of the technical file, ensuring that potential geological risks are adequately addressed and




Public Disclosure
                      specific mitigation measures included in their technical files and emergency response plans. The PIU will design and
                      construct the Project’s structural elements in accordance with national legal requirements (notably NTE E.030 and
                      the complementary regulations) and consider GIIP, technical, and EHS aspects. In addition, specific measures will be
                      included in Emergency Preparedness and Response Plans, which will form part of the ESMP, and will include, among
                      others: the development of early warning systems, contingency measures and community training for the
                      construction and operation stages. These temporary construction works are likely to trigger labor influx, considering
                      that local labor will not be sufficient most of the time. Labor influx has the potential for adverse impacts on
                      neighboring and vulnerable communities with risks related to sexual abuse, molestation, exploitation and harassment
                      and resulting risks such as the spread of sexually transmitted diseases, among others. The ESMPs will address these
                      topics through mitigation and monitoring measures, in addition to the preparation of the SEA/SH Action Plan. The
                      construction works will require the deployment of security personnel, particularly in transport, water and sanitation,
                      and health subprojects, to safeguard both personnel and property. Accordingly, specific provisions to ensure the
                      health and safety of the community will be incorporated into the ESMPs. These provisions will include rules of
                      conduct, mandatory training requirements, and regular monitoring of security personnel. As a key mitigation
                      measure, the GORE will develop, adopt, and disclose a dedicated SEA/SH Action Plan no later than 60 days after the
                      Effectiveness Date, to be applied throughout Project implementation. This Action Plan will include an assessment of
                      SEA/SH risks, the dissemination of information to communities on risks, Codes of Conduct, and the operation of the
                      Grievance Mechanism (GM) during consultations, as well as the mapping of prevention and response services in the
                      areas of intervention. SEA/SH risks and mitigation measures will be integrated into both the Project’s and contractors’
                      ESMPs. The capacity of the implementing agency will be strengthened by including a gender specialist within the
                      Project Implementation Unit. In addition, bidding documents and contracts will include specific SEA/SH requirements.
                      Gender-segregated facilities will be made established and, where necessary, independent monitoring by third-party


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                      monitors with SEA/SH expertise will be considered. Also, service providers will be recruited to ensure safe and
                      confidential survivor-centered care in areas where immediate access to services is not available. These measures aim
                      to ensure a comprehensive and sustained approach to SEA/SH risks throughout Project implementation.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The Project will finance 33 subprojects in peri-urban and rural areas of Arequipa and the
                      Colca Valley, including investments in tourism infrastructure, cultural heritage restoration, road rehabilitation,
                      sanitation facilities, and health posts. Based on the latest information, no physical displacement is anticipated.
                      However, the E&S risks and impacts matrices identified potential impacts such as small-scale land acquisition,
                      restrictions on communal or public land use, and temporary economic displacement. For example, in Salinas Huito,
                      the proposed interpretation area overlaps with communally managed land, raising the possibility of restrictions on
                      herding areas. Similarly, in town centers where public space improvements, sanitation works, or tourism circuits are
                      planned, mobile vendors, artisans, and small businesses could experience temporary income loss during construction.
                      The Borrower, through the GORE, has committed to avoiding involuntary displacement and resettlement to the
                      maximum extent possible. This commitment will be codified in an Exclusion List to rule out activities that would
                      generate physical displacement, and will be included in the POM. Where land is needed, it will be acquired via
                      voluntary land donations or transfers, if not via land purchases on the real estate market. In the first scenario, all
                      proposed donations will be subject to a due diligence process to ensure that they are genuinely voluntary,
                      documented, and free from coercion. For all project activities that may require involuntary land acquisition or
                      economic displacement, the Borrower will prepare and implement Livelihood Restoration Plans (LRPs) for each
                      implicated subproject, in line with ESS5, after the technical designs are finalized and the relevant impacts can be



Public Disclosure
                      more clearly defined, but always prior to the implementation of works. These Plans will establish eligibility criteria,
                      provide compensation at full replacement cost, ensure that payments and livelihood support are delivered before
                      displacement, and include tailored measures for vulnerable groups. They will also ensure meaningful consultation
                      with affected persons and provide access to an effective grievance mechanism. If restrictions on land use are required
                      to conserve natural habitats or areas of high ecological value, particularly within or adjacent to the Salinas and
                      Aguada Blanca National Reserve (SABNR), the Borrower will prepare a Process Framework in line with ESS5. This will
                      define how communities participate in decision-making, set out measures to address potential livelihood impacts,
                      and promote equitable benefit-sharing from conservation and sustainable tourism. Responsibilities for land
                      acquisition planning and implementation will rest with the PIU under the GORE Arequipa, supported by specialized
                      consultants as needed. LRPs will not be prepared as part of the bidding process; instead, they will be developed,
                      consulted on, and approved prior to the initiation of works causing the displacement. The Plans will also be disclosed
                      in-country and on the World Bank’s external website.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                 Relevant
                      Resources

                      The activities related to infrastructure construction and rehabilitation under subprojects, will be carried out within
                      existing areas, peri-urban areas, and/or in degraded areas have been previously disturbed and/or its vegetation
                      mostly consist of non-endangered species. However, it is possible that some civil works may potentially interfere with
                      native vegetation or areas of importance for biodiversity. As mentioned in the section A.1, three subprojects (one in
                      the water supply and sanitation sector, one in tourism and one in transport) intersect with the SABNR protected
                      natural area and seven subprojects (3 in water supply and sanitation, 1 in tourism, 1 in transportation, 1 in health,


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                      and 1 in the environmental sector) are located in the buffer zone of the SABNR. The SABNR encompasses a diversity
                      of high Andean ecosystems such as grasslands, wetlands, and queñuales forests. It also includes two Ramsar sites—
                      Laguna del Indio-Dique de los Españoles and Laguna de Salinas—which are key habitats for migratory birds such as
                      the Andean flamingo and other high Andean species The ESCP establishes that for Project implementation the PIU
                      shall develop a Biodiversity Management Plan, to manage any residual impacts, habitat loss, degradation and
                      fragmentation, invasive alien species and hydrological changes, as well as the definition of appropriate compensation
                      measures, as applicable, and duly documented within each ESMP and C-ESMP. Specific and stringent measures will be
                      also therein included, aiming to avoid and mitigate any risks and impacts that could alter or cause destruction or
                      degradation of any critical or sensitive natural habitats, especially queñual forests and wetlands within and outside
                      the national protected areas. Also, civil works related to the potential establishment and use of associated facilities,
                      within and outside the SABNR, such as material storage areas, quarries, surplus material deposits and work camps
                      may negatively affect biodiversity, habitats, and ecosystem services. The GORE Arequipa identified these potential
                      risks and impacts, analysed them according to the available information, considering that most of the subprojects are
                      in the idea and profile stage and have not yet defined the sites for the associated facilities, and proposed preliminary
                      management and mitigation measures in the E&S risks and impacts matrices. It has also confirmed that SERNANP
                      does not allow activities that are incompatible with conservation objectives to be carried out within the SABNR
                      and/or its buffer zone, which is reflected in the issuance of its technical opinion on each subproject. For the Tarucani
                      WWTP, a significant risk has been identified to elements of flora conservation (such as wetlands) and high Andean
                      fauna, due to the execution of civil works that include the expansion of the WWTP's capacity. A detailed
                      environmental and social assessment of the impacts of effluent discharges on wetlands and surface and groundwater
                      bodies will be carried out, under the ESMP, including measures related to the repositioning and/or compensation of




Public Disclosure
                      native vegetation, periodic monitoring of effluent, contingency measures for system failures, among others, in
                      accordance with ESS6. Additionally, the environment subproject includes reforestation of degraded forest areas and
                      the provision of training and technical assistance. While mainly positive impacts are expected -such as an
                      improvement in the provision of ecosystem services- risks may arise from the inappropriate selection of species and
                      the introduction of exotic or invasive species. These risks are exacerbated by PIU’s lack of experience managing E&S
                      aspects under the Bank’s ESF.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                             Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is relevant. The project will be implemented in rural areas of Arequipa and the Colca Valley, including
                      Caylloma Province, where small farmer communities with Quechua populations constitute a significant share of
                      residents. According to the 2017 National Census (INEI), approximately 35% of Caylloma’s population reported
                      Quechua as their mother tongue, compared to 20% in the Arequipa region overall. These communities are
                      characterized by a collective attachment to their territories, distinct identities, ancestral productive practices, and
                      cultural worldviews strongly linked to their lands and natural resources. They may not be exclusively Quechua
                      speakers and often have limited access to formal education. Potential impacts—both positive and negative—have
                      been identified. On the positive side, the project is expected to generate economic opportunities for indigenous
                      peoples through community-based tourism, artisan value chains, and improved access to services. On the negative
                      side, risks include cultural commodification, exclusion from benefits if engagement is not inclusive, disruption of
                      livelihoods during construction (e.g., mobile vendors and artisans), and potential restrictions on communal land use.
                      Depending on the nature and location of subprojects, interventions may overlap with recognized comunidades


                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                      campesinas in the Colca Valley. In such cases, these communities qualify as indigenous peoples under ESS7 and where
                      significant impacts on communal lands, resources, or livelihoods are anticipated, Free, Prior and Informed Consent
                      (FPIC) will be required. Consequently, the GORE will apply FPIC requirements strictly in those subprojects and will
                      prepare, consult on, and adopt site-specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) as technical designs are finalized and
                      impacts can be more clearly defined. The GORE has kicked off an inclusive engagement process that builds on
                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) provisions, which includes tailored measures for indigenous peoples. Culturally
                      appropriate consultations have already begun and will continue throughout implementation, using participatory
                      mapping, bilingual materials in Spanish and Quechua, and assemblies led by communal authorities. Consultations will
                      be designed to understand internal power dynamics and decision-making systems, including traditional institutions
                      and practices. The project will engage community-level representatives and, where relevant, other community
                      members; and coordinate with relevant public institutions (e.g., national indigenous peoples’ commissions) as well as
                      Indigenous Peoples’ Organizations (IPOs) and supporting NGOs. These consultations are intended to identify
                      priorities, inform risk management, and ensure equitable access to Project benefits. The Project’s Grievance
                      Mechanism (GM) will be flexible enough to accommodate the social and cultural characteristics of each subproject,
                      including those involving indigenous peoples. The GM will provide multiple accessible channels for feedback, such as
                      oral submissions during community assemblies, focal points in municipal and communal organizations, and dedicated
                      phone/WhatsApp lines in Spanish and Quechua. It will be free of charge, allow for anonymous complaints, and
                      guarantee confidentiality and protection against retaliation. Implementation of ESS7 requirements—including the
                      deployment of FPIC where required, the preparation of IPPs, and the use of culturally appropriate grievance
                      mechanisms—is reflected in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), with monitoring by the PIU and
                      supervision by the World Bank.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      Subprojects in the tourism sector include interventions for the enhancement of archaeological sites such as Chimpa
                      Fortress, Mollepunku Caves, Uyo Uyo archeological complex, Occolle amphitheater and Shininea tombs. These
                      interventions seek to upgrade public tourism services and include improving accessibility, building
                      visitor/interpretation centers, installing panoramic viewpoints and providing infrastructure such as restrooms and
                      parking lots, among others. In addition, ten colonial churches that are part of the National Cultural Heritage will be
                      intervened. Restoration work will be carried out on the walls, towers, ceilings of churches along with the restoration
                      of mural paintings. These sites are administered by the Ministry of Culture (MINCUL). Cultural Heritage Management
                      Plans will be developed for each site, as part of the technical studies, and will be approved by the MC prior to the
                      start of the works. These plans will be developed in close consultation with AUTOCOLCA, Catholic Church authorities,
                      and local communities, and will include measures to manage risks related to restoration works, ongoing use of places
                      of worship, movable cultural heritage and increased visitation exceeding the sites’ carrying capacity. The transport,
                      water and sanitation, and health subprojects must obtain a Certificate of Non-Existence of Archaeological Remains
                      (CIRA) and Archaeological Monitoring Plans in accordance with national regulations. Although construction work will
                      be carried out in previously disturbed areas, there is a possibility of finding archaeological remains during earthworks
                      in the construction site or auxiliary areas. The ESMPs will furthermore include Chance Finds Procedures for the
                      intervention areas, and construction contracts will include clauses requiring civil contractors to take proper protective
                      measures in case cultural heritage sites are discovered, including to stop construction activities if archaeological or
                      cultural sites are encountered during construction activities. Aiming to manage potential risks and impacts resulting




                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                     Page 16 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                      from TA activities, terms of reference, work plans or other documents will be developed to define the scope and
                      outcomes of these activities, so that the advice and other support provided is consistent with ESS8.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      The project will not make use of financial intermediation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                          In Part
                       The Project will partially use the Borrower’s Environmental and Social (E&S) Framework, specifically for ESS1–
                       Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts, as Peruvian requirements relating to
                       ESIA and the preparation of ESMPs for minor, low-impact works at the regional level are materially consistent with the
                       objectives of this Standard. Accordingly, absent certain aggravating factors (such as the physical presence of
                       indigenous peoples, or of sensitive cultural heritage), the GORE Arequipa will not prepare complementary
                       management plans for subprojects involving such works, but will instead rely on the national- and regional (Arequipa)-



Public Disclosure
                       level normative frameworks to regulate aspects such as OHS issues and the management of wastes and nuisances
                       involved with small-scale construction. The development of these E&S instruments will be based on the sector-specific
                       environmental and social Matrices included in the ESA, created during the Project’s preparation phase. It is essential
                       to ensure that all mitigation measures applicable to the Project's activities are carefully incorporated.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                  No
                       N/A

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The following E&S instruments have been prepared and will be adopted and disclosed prior to Appraisal:
                     - Environmental and Social Assessment report including: i) six E&S Risk and Impact Matrices for the tourism, culture,
                     transport, water supply & sanitation, health, and environment sectors, including appropriate mitigation measures in
                     accordance with the relevant ESSs, to ensure that risk assessments and mitigation measures are tailored to address the
                     specific vulnerabilities of particular groups impacted by the project; and ii) terms of reference or outline for subproject-
                     specific ESMPs.
                     - Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     - Draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)



                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 17 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                     The following E&S instruments are proposed to be developed and adopted within 90 days after Effectiveness:
                     - Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     - SEA/SH Action Plan
                     - Final Stakeholder Engagement Plan

                     The following E&S instruments are proposed to be developed before the engineering design of the projects developed
                     in the RNSAB:
                     -Biodiversity Management Plan (BMP) as needed.

                     The following E&S instruments are proposed to be developed, consulted on and disclosed as part of each bidding
                     process, to be executed subsequently by the selected contractor and supervision firm for each intervention:
                     - ESMP specific to each intervention, including assessment of environmental and social risks and impacts and respective
                     mitigation measures (based on the E&S Risks and Impacts Matrices).
                     - Site-specific Livelihoods Restoration Plan (LRP), as needed.
                     - Site-specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs), as needed.

                     Through the bidding documents, contractors will be required to prepare C-ESMPs, including provisions for stakeholder
                     engagement, labor issues management and grievance redress, among others. These shall be approved prior to the
                     initiation of construction activities.




Public Disclosure
                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Hind Kadiri                            Title:         Senior Private Sector Specialist

                      Email:                  hkadiri@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Thomas Edward Haven                    Job Title:     Senior Private Sector Specialist

                      Email:                  thaven@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Cecilia Nallely Escalante Hernandez    Job Title:     Transport Specialist

                      Email:                  cescalante@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                  Page 18 of 19
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Of The Priority Tourism Destination Arequipa-colca In Peru (P511489)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                  Hind Kadiri, Thomas Edward Haven, Cecilia Nallely Escalante Hernandez

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:         Fiorella Cristina Pino Luna

                     ADM Social Specialist:                Kennan W. Rapp




Public Disclosure




                    Oct 21, 2025                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
