Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment Through Vibrant, Inclusive, And Viable Economies (P511605)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 08/28/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05120




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 03, 2025                                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment Through Vibrant, Inclusive, And Viable Economies (P511605)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P511605                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        SL-REVIVE                    2026

                     Operation Name            Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Sri Lanka                 Sri Lanka                                 SOUTH ASIA                   Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                                                      Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     External Resources   Ministry of Provincial Council and Local       10-Dec-2025                  05-Mar-2026
                     Department, Ministry Government
                     of Finance

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     20-Aug-2025               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve access to enabling infrastructure and services to catalyze economic development in selected priority areas
                     of Northern and Eastern Provinces.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Sri Lanka faces significant spatial disparities that hinder equitable and balanced growth opportunities, particularly in the
                     Northern and Eastern provinces. These provinces struggle with low GDP contributions (only 4.1% and 5.1%,
                     respectively) and high poverty rates (23.8% and 18.6%) compared to the national average of 14.3%. Unemployment
                     rates in districts like Jaffna, Kilinochchi, Ampara, and Batticaloa exceed 7%, well above the national average of 4.7%.
                     Despite the strong potential of key productive sectors such as fisheries, agriculture, and tourism in the Northern and
                     Eastern provinces, resources and assets remain largely underutilized. This is compounded by critical gaps in enabling

                    Sep 03, 2025                                                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment Through Vibrant, Inclusive, And Viable Economies (P511605)



                     infrastructure—including weak connectivity, inadequate water supply, poor solid waste management, and limited
                     productive facilities—as well as the absence of comprehensive regional development strategies and insufficient support
                     for priority economic value chains. Past efforts have focused narrowly on physical reconstruction with limited
                     coordination and the government is therefore keen to shift toward an integrated, growth-oriented approach that aligns
                     infrastructure investments with productive sector development and fosters greater private sector participation. To
                     address these challenges, the proposed operation adopts a programmatic and phased approach, with an emphasis on
                     spatially targeted investments in enabling infrastructure, support for productive value chains, and the mobilization of
                     private capital to accelerate regional growth and job creation. The first phase will focus on a coordinated set of
                     interventions within selected Priority Investment Areas (PIAs) to unlock the potential of regional productive sectors—
                     such as tourism, agriculture, aquaculture, and fisheries—while creating jobs and improving job quality. The project
                     interventions will focus on i) infrastructure development (e.g. roads, water supply, solid waste management, heritage
                     rehabilitation, productive infrastructure for fisheries), ii) value chain strengthening and private sector engagement, and
                     iii) strategic regional planning and institutional capacity building.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Northern and Eastern Provinces have a tropical climate with distinct wet and dry seasons with a wide range of
                     ecosystems including lagoons, mangroves, coral reefs, and sand dunes. Fauna includes the Asian elephant, leopards,
                     sloth bears, otters, and a wide range of birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish. Coral reefs and seagrass beds provide
                     habitat for dugongs, dolphins, and a diversity of fish and invertebrates. The IUCN Red List notes various mammals, birds,
                     and marine and coastal species in the two Provinces. Both Provinces are rich in cultural heritage, particularly relating to



Public Disclosure
                     religious practices and temples, and a dense network of colonial-era forts and port. Jaffna Fort is a prime example of
                     tangible cultural heritage that falls within the project areas and activities. Agriculture is the dominant livelihood and
                     includes fisheries, padi, livestock and dairy. Aquaculture is both coastal and freshwater. Consultations observed
                     reducing fish stocks in some areas. Decades of conflict and crises have left these regions with deep socio-economic
                     challenges and many vulnerable households, marked by a high share of female-headed households, elevated rural
                     poverty, low labor force participation—especially among women—and lower household incomes.
                     The Project Development Objective is to improve access to enabling infrastructure and services to catalyze economic
                     development in selected priority areas of Northern and Eastern Provinces. Project typologies include technical
                     assistance (e.g., feasibility studies, economic development plan preparation, a strategic environmental and social
                     assessment, establishment of a multi-stakeholder planning platform, and strategic regional planning and preparatory
                     assessments), civil works (e.g., the construction, upgrading, and rehabilitation of infrastructure assets, including
                     connectivity, water supply, public spaces, flood mitigation, and urban regeneration facilities), and capacity building.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of Provincial Councils and Local Government (MPCLG) and the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) will
                     serve as the primary Implementing Ministries for the Project. The MPCLG holds the mandate to coordinate activities
                     with Provincial Councils, while the MoUD is the lead government agency responsible for spatial planning. Two Program
                     Management Units (PMUs) will be established—one under each ministry. Project Implementing Units (PIUs) will be set
                     up within the two participating Provincial Governments to support the day-to-day activities. The PMUs will be the main
                     counterparts responsible for management, and oversight of all project activities, including E&S risk management, and all
                     related responsibilities regarding technical assessment, design, and civil works, including works supervision, monitoring,

                    Sep 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment Through Vibrant, Inclusive, And Viable Economies (P511605)



                     and evaluation, and reporting. The two PIUs will report directly to the PMU and will be responsible for implementation
                     of project activities.
                     MPCLG has prior experience with WB Safeguard Policies through the Local Development Support Project but
                     demonstrated E&S risk management capacity constraints and required significant support during project
                     implementation. MoUD, through the Metro Colombo Urban Development Project (MCUDP) and the Strategic Cities
                     Development Project (SCDP), has managed complex projects involving E&S assessments and resettlement plans. Neither
                     ministry has experience with the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) or has dedicated E&S units.
                     Establishing a team of experienced staff, targeted capacity building on ESF implementation will be necessary to ensure
                     effective management of E&S aspects throughout the project lifecycle. One Environmental Specialist and one Social
                     Specialist will be engaged under the Grant Facility for Project Preparation (GFPP) to support Project readiness. Other
                     E&S resources will be engaged within 60 days of Project effectiveness. ES HEIS is under discussion with UDA.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                  High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                           High
                     The environmental risk classification is ‘high’. Whilst both technical assistance and civil works are expected to result in
                     impacts that are medium in magnitude and spatial consent and have a low probability of serious adverse effects to
                     the environment, some cumulative impacts are expected, Project activities are not yet finalized, and the two IAs have
                     limited capacity for managing E&S risks and impacts. The final risk classification will be reviewed once Project PIAs are



Public Disclosure
                     finalized, based on readiness criteria (e.g., feasibility studies, land acquisition, existing E&S instruments); and
                     mitigation measures will be confirmed through the development and implementation of environmental and social
                     impact assessments (ESIAs), environmental and social management plans (ESMPs), and potentially a strategic or
                     sectoral environmental and social assessment (SESA) that will consider the indirect and cumulative impacts of
                     regional economic development. Civil works may result in the generation of dust, noise, erosion and sedimentation,
                     waste generation, and impacts to either marine or terrestrial biodiversity, as well as occupational and community
                     health and safety impacts. Some works may be located in the vicinity of protected areas and the IUCN Red List and
                     national assessments have identified vulnerable, endangered, and critically endangered species within the two
                     provinces. Technical assistance will likely have similar downstream and indirect impacts to those listed above.
                     Economic development can result in cumulative impacts (e.g., land clearance, waste generation, multiple water
                     discharges etc.) which will be considered in sub-project specific E&S assessments. Operational risks and impacts may
                     include the consumption of water and energy, waste generation, and ongoing discharges. These risks and impacts will
                     be managed through the development and implementation of operational ESMPs or E&S management systems
                     (ESMSs) as determined through the E&S screening process.
                                                                                                                                             High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project’s social risk rating is assessed as 'High' at concept stage. This rating reflects the lack of clarity on the
                     associated social risks, as activities are yet to be finalized, the limited capacity of the implementing agencies and the
                     range of potential risks. Key risks may include potential resettlement impacts, impacts on vulnerable populations,
                     risks due to labor influx, and occupational, community health and safety and impacts on cultural assets. Infrastructure
                     development may cause potential physical and economic displacement of houses, shops, and businesses. To minimize


                    Sep 03, 2025                                                                                                         Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment Through Vibrant, Inclusive, And Viable Economies (P511605)



                     these risks, the project will prioritize use of government owned land with minimal encumbrances. Given the history of
                     conflict and higher proportion of vulnerable populations in the two provinces, project activities will be designed to
                     avoid exacerbating inequalities or creating new vulnerabilities. Mechanisms will be established to ensure equitable
                     benefit distribution and prevent exclusion of vulnerable groups. The anticipated labor influx and higher percentage of
                     female-headed households may increase the risk of Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, and Harassment (SEA/SH), requiring
                     robust mitigation measures. Civil works may cause temporary disturbances in urban areas, such as increased traffic,
                     noise, dust, and health and safety risks, including impacts on water quality and resource access. These impacts will be
                     managed with appropriate E&S instruments, informed by E&S screenings and potentially a strategic or sectoral
                     environmental and social assessment (SESA). Rehabilitation of cultural heritage sites will require appropriate
                     assessments, stakeholder consultations, and implementation of appropriate measures to protect such sites as
                     determined by E&S screening. Necessary E&S instruments including an E&S due diligence procedures, Resettlement
                     Planning Framework (RPF), a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be
                     prepared to manage the risks & impacts.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      E&S screening will be completed during project preparation to identify the required level of E&S assessment. SESA (or
                      similar) scope will be finalized once PIAs are confirmed to avoid an overly broad assessment and ensure actionable



Public Disclosure
                      outcomes. A strategic assessment will support a structured, participatory and analytical approach to E&S risk
                      management as regional economic development can have significant cumulative and indirect impacts on people and
                      ecosystems. Any existing E&S assessments will be reviewed during Project preparation, and an E&S screening
                      procedure will guide the identification and completion of gaps. GPFF will finance key project preparation activities
                      including E&S screening and preparation of the SEP, RPF and LMP. The timing of the preparation of other instruments
                      and mitigation measures will be detailed in the ESCP and procurement for physical works will not commence prior to
                      the completion of E&S due diligence (including public disclosure and stakeholder review).

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant to this project as stakeholder engagement is integral to E&S risk management and will be
                      undertaken throughout the project lifecycle, involving local communities, government agencies, civil society, private
                      sector actors in tourism and fisheries, and project beneficiaries. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be
                      prepared and disclosed by Appraisal. The SEP will be informed by a stakeholder analysis to identify Project-Affected
                      Parties (PAPs), including vulnerable groups, and Other Interested Parties (OIPs). The SEP will detail culturally
                      appropriate, accessible information disclosure and meaningful, inclusive consultations, with special measures for
                      vulnerable groups. The GM will be accessible, transparent, and timely, with clear procedures and an appeals process.
                      The project design incorporates structured consultations and establishes a multi-stakeholder platform for regional
                      planning, to enhance stakeholder engagement and civic participation.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant



                    Sep 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment Through Vibrant, Inclusive, And Viable Economies (P511605)



                      ESS2 on Labor and Working Conditions is relevant to this project, and will apply for all project workers including
                      Direct Workers employed by the PMUs and PIUs, Contracted Workers engaged by contractors and primary supply
                      worker. Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared to address risks associated with labor. The LMP will
                      build on areas of national labor laws, with a gap filling measures to ensure compliance with ESS2. The LMP will outline
                      employment terms, non-discrimination measures, prohibition of child and forced labor, OHS requirements,
                      adherence to WBG EHS Guidelines, establishment of a confidential worker GRM, and implementation of Codes of
                      Conduct (including GBV/SEA prevention). The Borrower will be responsible for LMP implementation, monitoring, and
                      capacity building. LMP will be prepared during the project preparation and before the engagement of any project
                      workers, including the PMU/PIUs.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant as the project involves civil works and TA that will result in the consumtion of resources, generate
                      waste, and produce emissions. Key considerations include energy and water efficiency, management of construction
                      and operational waste, control of air emissions (e.g., dust and GHG), and erosion and sedimentation. Resource
                      efficiency and pollution prevention measures will be assessed and managed in line with World Bank Group
                      Environment, Health, and Safety Guidelines and Good International Industry Practice, with specific details to be
                      elaborated in the sub-project ESMPs. E&S screening will identify where E&S assessments must consider cumulative
                      impacts and whether activates may result in the use of pesticides (though unlikely). The project's focus on enhancing
                      water supply, sanitation, and solid waste management will result in positive environmental outcomes and the Project
                      will promote green, sustainable, resilient and climate smart technologies.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant to this project due to anticipated infrastructure works and increased community interaction. Key
                      community health and safety risks include construction-related impacts (noise, dust, traffic), road safety concerns,
                      and risks from labor influx. E&S Screenings will be conducted by Appraisal for the priority investments which will
                      inform the E&S instruments to be prepared, such as Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), which will
                      include community health & safety, GBV/SEA prevention & traffic management measures. Also, measures to prevent
                      the spread of communicable and vector-borne diseases like dengue will be implemented. All infrastructure will be
                      designed for structural safety and universal access. Emergency preparedness, stakeholder engagement, and
                      consideration of vulnerable groups will be integrated throughout project preparation and implementation. ESMPs &
                      other instruments will be prepared and disclosed before commencement of bidding for civil works.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant as the project’s infrastructure development may require land acquisition, potentially resulting in
                      physical and economic displacement of houses, shops, and businesses. The project will explore alternatives to avoid
                      or minimize displacement, such as adjusting infrastructure designs or selecting alternative sites, and will prioritize the
                      use of government owned land with minimal encumbrances. A Resettlement Planning Framework (RPF) will be
                      prepared and disclosed prior to Appraisal which will guide the preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                      including livelihood restoration plans as required. RAPs will be based on a census and socio-economic survey of
                      affected populations, detailing affected persons, asset values, and compensation measures. If Voluntary Land
                      Donation (VLD) is considered, strict ESS5 criteria will apply.


                    Sep 03, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment Through Vibrant, Inclusive, And Viable Economies (P511605)



                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant due to the potential for direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts on biodiversity and habitats. The
                      project will promote climate-smart agriculture, sustainable fisheries, and eco-tourism, which, while beneficial,
                      requires careful planning to ensure biodiversity conservation and sustainable resource management outcomes. IUCN
                      Red List and national assessments have identified vulnerable, endangered, and critically endangered species within
                      the two provinces. E&S screening will be completed during project preparation to identify and classify habitats, assess
                      potential impacts, and inform the application of the mitigation hierarchy, including the requirement to develop sub-
                      project biodiversity management plans/action plans. Activities leading to increased pressure on fish stock will be
                      noted as ineligible activities within the ESCP and, if a SESA is financed, it will consider biodiversity risks including
                      habitat loss, fragmentation, and cumulative impacts.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                               Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 may apply if Indigenous Peoples are affected by project activities. In Sri Lanka, the Veddah are the only
                      historically recognized Indigenous group meeting ESS7 criteria. They are a small community of approximately 5,000–
                      10,000 people, with some communities that may reside in the towns and coastal areas of Batticaloa and
                      Trincomalee—both targeted by the project. All subprojects will therefore be screened, per E&S procedures, to
                      determine the presence of such groups. If present, they will be consulted in a manner consistent with ESS7, and
                      subproject-specific Indigenous Peoples Development Plans (IPDPs) will be prepared before commencing any



Public Disclosure
                      activities. Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) will be required where impacts involve land, livelihoods, cultural
                      heritage, or relocation. The project will also ensure that the GRM is culturally appropriate and accessible to
                      Indigenous Peoples, incorporating customary dispute resolution mechanisms.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      ESS8 is considered relevant to this project. Project activities, such as the urban regeneration of Jaffna City’s urban and
                      cultural heritage, trigger the need for consideration of cultural heritage impacts. The project's focus on infrastructure
                      development and urban regeneration may involve excavations, demolition, earth movement, or other physical
                      environmental changes that could potentially impact unknown archaeological resources or known built heritage.
                      Therefore, a cultural heritage assessment will be required, along with stakeholder consultation, adherence to a
                      Chance Finds Procedure, and potentially the development of Cultural Heritage Management Plans (CHMPs), as
                      determined by E&S screening. Operational phase risks may result from increased visitor pressure. Planning
                      documents will need to consider managing site access, balancing conservation and tourism benefits, preventing
                      overcrowding, and protecting sensitive resources.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not relevant as the project financing will be directly implemented by the government and does not involve the
                      use of Financial Intermediaries to channel funds to sub-projects.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                    Sep 03, 2025                                                                                                        Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment Through Vibrant, Inclusive, And Viable Economies (P511605)



                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                      No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                               No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                     In Part
                       ESF will guide the risk management approach. The project will build on elements of the Borrower’s Framework (BF)
                       consistent with the ESS, and apply ESF where gaps exist. For example, the national EIA system has known gaps,
                       particularly the lack of requirements to assess social impacts; E&S assessments will be supplemented to bridge this.
                       For ESS2, the project will comply with applicable national labor laws. Gap-bridging measures will be set out in the
                       LMP, including establishing a GRM for workers and requiring all project workers to sign SEA/SH Codes of Conduct. For
                       ESS5, where land acquisition is required, the project will build on Sri Lanka’s Land Acquisition Act with gap-filling
                       measures to ensure timely compensation at replacement cost, compensation for non-title holders’ non-land assets, an
                       accessible GRM, and meaningful consultations.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             No
                       Financing partners have not been considered at this point.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or



Public Disclosure
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Project Preparation will consider how best to embed E&S considerations into planning activities and to address the
                     downstream, indirect and cumulative impacts of economic development such as changing land use, biodiversity loss,
                     issues around carrying capacity and other support services such as waste management etc. for the two provinces. The
                     approach and scoping (for example, SESA TOR) will be completed prior to Appraisal.

                     The exact instruments that will be required will be determined after PIAs are finalized and the E&S screening is
                     completed for the selected PIAs. Subsequently, the Appraisal ESRS will clearly state what E&S assessments are required
                     for each PIA.

                     The following tasks will be completed prior to Appraisal:
                     1.       The government has previously prepared feasibility studies for some of the proposed project investment area
                     (PIA) activities. A review will be completed of any existing E&S assessments where available. Gap analyses will be
                     completed to identify updates required to ensure compliance with the ESSs during project implementation. Existing
                     E&S assessments will be disclosed.
                     2. Preliminary E&S screening of confirmed project activities and respective reports disclosed prior to project
                     Appraisal.
                     3.       An Environmental and Social commitment Plan will be developed, consulted, and disclosed.
                     4.       A Resettlement Policy Framework and disclosed prior to project Appraisal.
                     5.       Stakeholder Engagement Plan will be prepared and disclosed prior to project Appraisal.



                    Sep 03, 2025                                                                                                   Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment Through Vibrant, Inclusive, And Viable Economies (P511605)



                     The following tasks will be completed prior to Effectiveness:
                     1.      E&S screening procedure, forms, and an ineligible list and E&S due diligence requirements will be included in
                     the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).
                     2.      A Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared and disclosed.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Phoram Shah                          Title:           Senior Urban Specialist

                      Email:                  pshah5@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Gayatri Singh                        Job Title:       Lead Urban Specialist

                      Email:                  gsingh9@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank



Public Disclosure
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                            Phoram Shah, Gayatri Singh

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                   Rosemary Alexandra Davey

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                          Shanek Mario Fernando




                    Sep 03, 2025                                                                                                    Page 9 of 9
