Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 04/20/2026 | Report No: ESRSA04948




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Apr 20, 2026                                                                          Page 1 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym             Approval Fiscal Year

                     P511557                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         PARAIB NE MPA                 2027

                     Operation Name            Paraiba Water Security Project (Northeast MPA Phase I)

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries              Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Brazil                    Brazil                                     LATIN AMERICA AND             Water
                                                                                          CARIBBEAN

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                   Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     State Government of       AESA - State Water Resources               17-Mar-2026                   16-Jul-2026
                     Paraiba                   Management Executive Agency -
                                               Agência Executiva de Gestão das
                                               Águas, CAGEPA - State Water and
                                               Sanitation Company - Companhia de



Public Disclosure
                                               Água e Esgotos da Paraíba, SEIRH -
                                               State Secretariat for Infrastructure and
                                               Water Resources

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     10-Feb-2026               74,668,357.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To (i) strengthen the foundations for water security in the State; and (ii) increase the access to resilient water services.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Project will constitute the Phase 1 of the Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) ‘Integrated Water Security
                     Program for the Northeast of Brazil’. Most of the region’s nine states face similar constraints, including limited water

                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                                        Page 2 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                     availability, recurrent droughts and floods, fragmented institutions, and underdeveloped infrastructure and
                     management tools— further shaped by transboundary watersheds and aquifers, as well as shared hydraulic
                     infrastructure. These commonalities present a valuable opportunity for horizontal learning and collaboration, enabling
                     states to exchange knowledge and build on each other’s innovations and good practices. Several states have already
                     developed effective solutions that are highly relevant and replicable across the region. The MPA will facilitate structured
                     knowledge exchange and coordination across the states, helping reduce negative externalities and enhance the
                     collective impact of water security investments. About 7.3 percent of the Northeast Region’s population lives in the
                     State of Paraiba; within Paraiba, 77.6 are urban residents and 22.4 percent live in rural areas (IBGE, 2022). The state's
                     water security challenges and socioeconomic landscape present a great opportunity to test and refine the Program's
                     strategies. Phase 1 of the MPA comprises activities prioritized by the State Government aimed at improving water
                     security across Paraíba, strengthening key sector water institutions such as the State Water Resources Management
                     Executive Agency (Agência Executiva de Gestão das Águas, AESA), the State Water and Sanitation Company (Companhia
                     de Água e Esgotos da Paraíba, CAGEPA), and a newly created Executive Management Unit for Rural Sanitation (Gerencia
                     Executiva de Saneamento Rural, GESR), and constructing essential infrastructure such as a wastewater treatment plant
                     (WWTP), the sectorization of the water supply distribution system to reduce non-revenue water (NRW), and the
                     construction of a water transmission main for the Gramame system, all serving the RMJP. The Project builds on lessons
                     from the ongoing Paraiba Improving Water Resources Management and Services Provision Project (Projeto de
                     Seguranca Hídrica or PSH by its acronym in Portuguese), approved in 2019. PSH includes construction of water mains to
                     transfer water from the São Francisco River’s Integration Project to 27 municipalities in the regions in Agreste and
                     Borborema, automation and partial sectorization of RMJP's water network to reduce NRW, improvements in
                     wastewater collection for energy efficiency, and institutional strengthening of CAGEPA. . The Project will include the




Public Disclosure
                     following components: Component 1. Foundations for Water Security. This component aims to contribute to proactive
                     WRM in the state by strengthening the state WRM institution (AESA) and consolidating key management instruments
                     related to water quantity, quality, and drought resilience. It will focus on expanding surface and groundwater
                     monitoring, fostering dialogue on the costs and financial sustainability of the water management system, improving
                     water licenses and charges, and establishing water quality standards through a participatory process with society, along
                     with the necessary actions to achieve those standards. The component will also focus on increasing the state’s capacity
                     for drought management through increased monitoring and warning mechanisms for implementation of adequate
                     measures, and the proposition of a state water reuse policy. Component 2. Resilient Water Services. This component is
                     designed to advance the modernization and expansion of WSS, supporting the state water utility (CAGEPA), the state
                     regulatory agency (ARPB), and a recently created unit that will lead the development of a strategy and plan to support
                     rural water supply and sanitation in the state, the Gerencia Executiva de Saneamento Rural (GESR). It also includes the
                     construction and equipment of water infrastructure that will enhance the quality of life for residents, improve
                     environmental outcomes, and promote economic growth in the metropolitan region of Joao Pessoa. It includes the
                     following subcomponents: (2.1) Expansion of the water supply system in RJMP, this subcomponent will fund the
                     construction of a transmission main connected to the Gramame System; the water supply system includes three existing
                     dams, two of them interconnected and classified as large dams, Gramame and Mamuaba dams; (2.2) Reduction of
                     water losses in RJMP, this subcomponent involves constructing and optimizing selected water supply network sectors to
                     reduce physical water losses in the CAGEPA’s distribution network in the RMJP; (2.3) Expansion and modernization of
                     the WWTP in RMJP, this subcomponent comprises civil works and acquisition of equipment to improve and expand
                     wastewater treatment services in the RMJP under a design-and-build contract; (2.4) Support to the Regulatory Agency
                     of Paraiba State, this subcomponent will fund technical assistance and training to strengthen ARPB’s institutional
                     capacity and regulatory effectiveness; and (2.5) Rural Sanitation, which will provide technical assistance to SEIRH for the


                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                                     Page 3 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                     improvement of management models for the operation and maintenance of WSS services in the state. Component 3.
                     Partnership for Water Security and Project Management. This component will fund knowledge sharing and learning
                     activities between the Borrower and other States in areas of interest for dissemination of best practices including, inter
                     alia, institutional capacity for WRM, data use and information systems, sustainable management models for rural WSS,
                     and NRW control solutions. The component will also provide support to strengthening the technical and administrative
                     capacity of the PMU with respect to technical, financial management, audit, procurement, monitoring and evaluation,
                     social and environmental, and communication and information technology activities, including through the hiring of
                     consultants. Activities will include the provision of independent audit services.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Located in the Brazilian Northeast Region, the Paraiba State is the Brazilian state with the lowest water availability, faces
                     major challenges in human water supply, made worse by frequent droughts and climate variability. Events like the
                     severe rationing of 1999-2000, when reservoirs reached historic lows, highlight these issues.

                     To deal with water scarcity resulting from adverse climatic and hydrogeological conditions, Paraíba has developed a
                     solid policy for the management of water resources with the construction of several dams. At the end of 2024, AESA
                     had registered a total of existing 629 dams. The State Government (Secretariat of Infrastructure and Water Resources)
                     owns 97 dams and DNOCS (National Department of Works Against Droughts) owns 18 dams. The dams owned by these
                     entities are considered strategic for water security in the State.




Public Disclosure
                     The State covers an area of 56,467 km² and is administratively divided into 223 municipalities. Geographically, it can be
                     separated into four distinct zones, each with unique physiographic characteristics: the Mata (Coastal), the Agreste, the
                     Borborema, and the Sertão Zones. The Zona da Mata lies adjacent to the Atlantic coast, stretching several kilometers
                     inland. This region is characterized by a humid tropical climate, abundant rainfall, and diverse biotic features. Its
                     vegetation includes localized areas of mangroves, restinga, and the Atlantic Forest. The Zona da Mata encompasses the
                     João Pessoa Metropolitan Region, which includes 12 municipalities such as João Pessoa, Cabedelo, Bayeux, Conde,
                     Lucena, Mamanguape, Rio Tinto, and Santa Rita. The RMJP is home to a population of approximately 1.4 million people.

                     João Pessoa, with 15.5% real estate growth in 12 years, attracts tourists and investors but struggles with public
                     infrastructure, especially sanitation. Rapidly growing neighborhoods have overloaded water systems, causing pressure
                     drops, in summer. To meet rising demand, the Borrower plans to develop an additional water main, within the existing
                     water grid and implement a non-revenue water reduction program. The project interventions will include the expansion
                     of the Baixo Paraíba Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP), the construction of an additional water main within
                     Gramame system, and the division of the RMJP water supply system into sectors. All the civil work supported by the
                     Project will be implemented in urban areas or anthropized, peri-urban areas.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Brazil has advanced environmental, social (including Indigenous Peoples rights), and labor laws. The National Sanitation
                     Law (Federal Law No. 14,026/2020) sets national guidelines for water supply, sewage treatment, urban cleaning, waste
                     management, and environmental protection. Brazil’s laws on access to information and privacy are robust, including the


                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                                       Page 4 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                     Access to Information Law (Law 12,527/2011), which guarantees public access to information and grievance
                     mechanisms.

                     The National Environment Council (CONAMA) is a key regulatory body, developing standards for environmental
                     protection. CONAMA Resolution 430/2011 regulates liquid effluent discharge into water bodies.

                     The Borrower has a proven track record with World Bank projects (P165683, P147158, P511645) in water management
                     and agriculture, consistently complying with social and environmental criteria. UGP staff are regularly trained on ESF
                     requirements to ensure effective stakeholder engagement and mitigation of impacts.

                     The Overview Assessment of Brazil's Legal, Institutional and Policy Framework for Environmental and Social
                     Management, (issued October 2025), found that the Brazilian regulations on safety of dams are well aligned with the
                     ESF. The National Safety of Dams Policy (PNSB), established by Laws 14.066/ 2020 and 12.334/2010, determines the
                     classification of dams by size, risk and potential damage, and requires the preparation of dam safety plans, including
                     O&M and emergency preparedness plans (EPPs). AESA is responsible for the supervision of dams located in the rivers
                     within the Paraiba State jurisdiction. AESA has a series of regulations on safety of dams, (e.g., resolutions 3/2016,
                     4/2016, 02/2019 and 01/2023), detailing the minimum scope of the dam safety plans and frequency of inspections.
                     AESA issues annual reports on safety of dams, presenting the cadaster of the existing dams, risk classification, summary
                     of supervision activities and safety assessment of the existing dams. Additionally, the Borrower is familiar with the Bank
                     requirements on safety of dams. The Paraiba State Annual Dam Safety report is available at AESA
                     site(www.aesa.pb.gov.br).




Public Disclosure
                     To coordinate the Project in its different stages, a PMU reporting directly to the State Secretariat for Infrastructure,
                     Water Resources and Environment (SEIRHMA) will be established. The PMU will consist of technical coordination staff,
                     representing SEIRHMA, Paraiba State Water Resources Management Executive Agency (AESA) and Water and Sewerage
                     Company of Paraiba (CAGEPA).


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Moderate
                     This Project builds on a successful previous operation, aiming to strengthen IWRM, improve water service reliability,
                     and enhance the efficiency of WSS in the RMJP. The Project will provide technical support and will fund investments
                     in WSS infrastructure. Component 1 will offer technical assistance and small monitoring activities with minimal
                     environmental risk. Component 2 will focus on sanitation, including the construction of a 36 km water main within
                     the RMJP reticulation system, expansion of the Baixo Paraíba WWTP, optimization of João Pessoa’s metropolitan
                     water supply, and rural water studies. Component 3 will fund project management activities, including social and
                     environmental compliance. All works will take place in urban or peri-urban areas, with no major construction in
                     sensitive zones or significant threats to biodiversity. Civil works will range from monitoring networks to moderately
                     complex WWTP and pipeline construction (about 18 months). Impacts are expected to be local and manageable,


                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                                     Page 5 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                     though the WWTP may directly affect the Paraiba River mangrove—currently degraded by effluent—which could
                     improve with the project but may also alter local use patterns. Design and procurement for the WWTP expansion will
                     include strict environmental management, complying with national regulations, mangrove protection, dam safety,
                     and legal limits for treated effluent and sludge management. The João Pessoa water supply system includes three
                     existing dams: the Marés dam, (classified as a small dam), and the interconnected Gramame and Mamuaba dams,
                     both classified as large dams. The referred dams are related to the Project, in accordance with the ESF Annex 1 of the
                     ESS 4, applying the requirements applicable to “Existing dams and dams under construction”. The Bank team visited
                     the dams and revised the available documentation, finding no eminent risk of failure. It was agreed that the Borrower
                     will prepare an independent dam safety assessment, Tier 1, of all dams related to the Project in accordance with the
                     terms of reference provided by the Bank and will prepare the dam safety plans of the related dams. The Borrower
                     agreed to incorporate the findings and recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures of the
                     independent dam safety assessment, as definied by the ESS4, in the TORs of the safety plans, to be funded by the
                     Project. The Project does not include any direct intervention on the related dams, such as rehabilitation works.
                                                                                                                                   Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Project, as Phase 1 of the Integrated Water Security Program for Northeast Brazil, aims to improve water supply
                     and security in RMJP and Paraíba. Building on the ongoing Paraiba Project, moderate social risks mainly stem from
                     infrastructure under Component 2, including involuntary resettlement and land acquisition. The WWTP site, though
                     state-owned, is occupied by families and an informal mineral extraction operation. These impacts are addressed in
                     the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) approved within the scope of Paraiba Project (P165683). The RAP's
                     implementation must be completed before this Project becomes effective. The majority of civil works contractors are




Public Disclosure
                     expected to be from the local vicinity; therefore, the labor influx risk is considered low at this stage. Community
                     health and safety risks related to temporary road blockades, traffic management, waste disposal, sexual exploitation
                     and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH) and associated disturbance to local communities, especially during
                     construction and operation of the WWTP, will be managed via the C-ESMPs. Child/forced labor risk is also rated low
                     due to labor legislation and age verification procedures applied for civil works, hazardous and heavy works
                     contractors. The risk of social exclusion for vulnerable groups is considered low, since the project will support
                     activities aimed at engagement and increase information about available benefits such as social tariffs, as part of the
                     SEP's prepared and disclosed during preparation phase, in addition to strong engagement with stakeholders in the
                     ongoing project. Other Component 2 activities, like reducing water losses in RMJP, will have minimal E&S impacts and
                     use non-destructive methods. Rural sanitation work will focus on developing a sustainable management model of
                     WSS services, while Component 1 will support key management systems for water resources, improved licensing, and
                     participatory water quality standards. Component 3 will strengthen the E&S risk management capacity.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      The Project involves construction and rehabilitation of WSS infrastructure, including expansion of the wastewater
                      treatment plant (WWTP), water transmission mains, and sectorization of water supply networks. These activities can
                      cause temporary and localized environmental impacts such as noise, dust, waste generation, and disturbance to local


                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                                    Page 6 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                      ecosystems during construction The interventions in the RMJP are expected to benefit local ecosystems by reducing
                      raw wastewater spillovers and minimizing treated effluent discharges into the Paraiba River estuary and mangroves.
                      These improvements will contribute to public health, environmental sustainability, and economic development in the
                      region. Engineering studies for the Gramame adductor system are in early stages, whereas improvements to João
                      Pessoa’s wastewater services are advanced, with preliminary engineering completed, an environmental license (LP
                      3061/2022) issued, and the E&S Assessment and Management Planis being updated to be conistent with the ESSs.
                      The Project’s impacts are expected to be site-specific, reversible, and manageable with standard mitigation measures.
                      Project sites are urban or peri-urban, and mitigation measures will address direct impacts such as pollution, WWTP
                      effluent discharge standards, construction-related noise, dust, waste, and disruptions to local traffic and
                      infrastructure. These measures will be detailed in the project’s Operation Manual and ESF instruments and will
                      comply with EHSGs.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant. Individuals and groups likely to be affected (direct beneficiaries) have been identified. They include
                      water users in urban and rural areas, beneficiary communities, River Basin Committees and the State Water
                      Resources Committee, and members of the local community affected, temporarily or permanently, by the project's
                      activities. There are separate groups of PAPs that require specific attention and may be considered disadvantaged or
                      vulnerable population in the project context: Traditional communities, population in extreme poverty, elderly and
                      disabled people, women heads of household and rural family farms, in the project zone that cannot for various
                      reasons participate in the engagement processes and express their opinions. The mapping of other stakeholders
                      identified the following entities: Municipal Governments of the RMJP; Municipal Secretariats of the Environment of



Public Disclosure
                      the RMJP; SEE - State Secretariat of Education of Paraíba (State Schools); IPHAN - National Institute of Historical and
                      Artistic Heritage; DNIT - National Department of Transport Infrastructure, as well as local NGOs and religious
                      institutions that can support engagement and dissemination of information. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                      has been prepared including engagement methods based on citizen participation approaches (face-to-face
                      community meetings, establishment of community-level committees, application of performance indicators, semi-
                      annual stakeholder engagement meetings, beneficiary satisfaction surveys and beneficiary feedback self-assessment
                      mechanism, etc.) and on behavior change and communication campaigns. The SEP also identifies potential
                      impediments to contacting stakeholders, as well as reflects/develops the capacity of implementing agencies to
                      engage with these stakeholders. The project will take special measures to ensure that disadvantaged and vulnerable
                      groups (low-income rural women, people with disabilities, families in remote areas) have equal opportunities to
                      access information, provide feedback, or file complaints. The SEP is a dynamic document and will be updated as
                      needed during project implementation. The client will also continue to implement the project-specific Grivance
                      Mechanism (GM), as in the ongoing project, allowing stakeholders to express their concerns, comments, and
                      suggestions, if any. The project's GM will also include procedures for handling confidential and sensitive complaints,
                      including the SEA/SH window.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The Project is expected to encompass the following categories of workers: direct and contracted workers. Direct
                      workers are those employed or engaged directly by the project proponent and the project implementing agencies
                      (SEIRH, AESA, CAGEPA) to work specifically in relation to the project. They are civil servants assigned to the project or
                      those deployed as ‘technical consultants’ by the project. The former will be governed by a set of civil services code;


                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                                       Page 7 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                      the latter, by mutually agreed contracts. Contracted workers will be employed or engaged through third parties
                      (contractors, sub-contractors, and other intermediaries) to perform work related to core functions of the project,
                      regardless of location, details of which will be known as and when activities' implementation begins. Potential labor
                      risks include OHS issues during construction. The labor influx risk is rated low, as civil works contractors are expected
                      to be from the local vicinity. Child/forced labor risk is also rated low due to labor legislation and age verification
                      procedures applied for civil works, hazardous and heavy works contractors. Brazilian labor law is robust on matters
                      related to working terms and conditions, protection of the labor force (including anti-discrimination, child and forced
                      labor, and OHS issues) and its use will render possible the achievement of results that are materially consistent with
                      the objectives of ESS2. The ESCP will include GM requirements for workers. To ensure the health and safety of
                      workers during project implementation, all construction contractors will be required to complete and implement a C-
                      ESMP, in line with ESS2 and Brazil Legislation. Appropriate mitigation measures to prevent SEA/SH risks at the
                      workplaces, including a template of Code of Conduct to be signed with all their workers, as measures to prevent and
                      mitigate OHS risks, will be included in site-specific C-ESMPs.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The Project incorporates activities that can bring positive impacts in terms of resource
                      efficiency/pollution prevention and management and the National Policy on Solid Waste (Law 12,305/2010) provide
                      robust guidelines for reverse logistics, Project-related GHG emissions are not likely to be significant and GHG
                      accounting is not required. However, the project will contribute to energy efficiency and water-energy nexus
                      solutions by strengthening the Borrower's capacity to plan and improve operational performance through energy
                      efficiency, asset management, and network renewal. The ESMP of the Expansion of water and sanitation services



Public Disclosure
                      should outline measures for managing waste generated during civil work, as well as operational requirements to
                      ensure compliance with the conditions of Preliminary License (No. 0119/2024), as well as to local and national
                      regulations, and with the requirements of ESS3. The WWTP’s contractor be required to develop Construction and
                      Demolition Waste Management procedures. The project ESMP will include measures to improve energy efficiency,
                      reduce non-revenue water (NRW), and enhance wastewater treatment, which will ultimately reduce pollution loads
                      and greenhouse gas emissions.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The Project will pose health and safety risks to the communities in its area of influence due
                      to the construction works under Component 2, which includes the construction of a WWTP and a 36 km long water
                      main, within the João Pessoa urban area. The construction poses potential safety risks to workers and surrounding
                      communities. For example, the construction of the water main will require temporary interruption of streets and use
                      of heavy equipment within urban areas. The Project may also cause localized impacts and risks related to transport of
                      hazardous materials and environmental noise. The ESMPs should include appropriate safety measures to avoid the
                      occurrence of incidents and injuries to workers and the community. Although major labor influx is not expected, the
                      ESMPs of the construction works and bidding documents must include measures for labor management and
                      procedures to address, assess, and monitor potential labor influx risks. The construction works will demand the
                      engagement of security personnel to safeguard its personnel and property. Security services are strictly regulated in
                      Brazil, including rules of conduct, training requirements and regular monitoring of security workers. The João Pessoa
                      water supply system includes three existing dams: the Marés dam, (classified as a small dam), and the interconnected
                      Gramame and Mamuaba dams, both classified as large dams. The referred dams are related to the Project, in


                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                                      Page 8 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                      accordance with the ESF Annex 1 of the ESS 4 and shall follow the safety of dams’ guidelines applicable to “Existing
                      dams and dams under construction”. The Gramame and Mamuaba dams are in the Municipality of Alhandra-PB, 10
                      km south of João Pessoa, and are currently operated by CAGEPA, the State Water Supply Utility. It includes two dams,
                      located in the Gramame and Mamuaba Rivers, interconnected by a canal. It has a total reservoir capacity, at full
                      supply level, of 56.93 Mm3. Both dams are earth fill and the maximum height is 18 m. There is only one ungated
                      spillway on the right abutment of the Gramame Dam. The dams’ primary purpose is water supply, benefiting a
                      population of around one million inhabitants. The Marés Dam is in the Marés Creek, within the João Pessoa urban
                      area. It was classified as a “small dam”, reservoir capacity of 2.1 Mm³ and total height 10.9 m and serves as a buffer
                      reservoir for peak hours. The dam type is earth fill and it was concluded in 1957. The independent dam safety
                      evaluation will assess whether the potential failure of the Marés Dam could cause significant adverse impacts on local
                      communities and assets, including assets to be financed as part of the proposed project. If positive, the Bank will
                      require the implementation of measures applicable to large dams. The Bank team visited the referred dams and
                      revised the available documentation, finding no eminent risk of failure. The Bank assessed the borrower’s system and
                      capacity for dam safety management and required the preparation of an independent assessment, Tier 1, of all dams
                      related to the Project, in accordance with the terms of reference provided by the Bank. The Borrower will retain an
                      independent dam safety team to: (a) inspect and evaluate the safety status of the existing dams, (including the Marés
                      Dam – classified as small), their appurtenances and performance history; (b) review and evaluate the owners’
                      operation and maintenance procedures; and (c) provide written reports of findings and recommendations for any
                      remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dams to an acceptable standard of
                      safety. The Borrower has agreed with the Bank on an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), which
                      outlines key actions to address environmental and social issues. These actions include, as required: (I) Prepare an




Public Disclosure
                      independent assessment for the Gramame, Mamuaba and Marés dams, in accordance with the terms of reference
                      agreed with the Bank. To be concluded no later than 30 days after the Project Effective Date; (ii) Incorporate the
                      recommendations from the independent dam safety assessment into the terms of reference for the dam safety plans
                      related to the Project, no later than 30 days after the Project Effective Date; (iii) Contract the safety plans for the
                      Gramame, Mamuaba and Marés dams, in accordance with ESS4, the BESF and World Bank best practices for dam
                      safety, no later than 1 year after the Project Effective Date; and (iv) Complete the safety plans for the Gramame,
                      Mamuaba and Marés dams in accordance with ESS4, the BESF and World Bank dam safety best practices. To be
                      concluded no later than 3 years after the Project Effective Date. The TOR of the safety plans will incorporate the
                      findings and recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures presented in the independent
                      evaluation, as definied by the ESS4, to be funded by the Project.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      The Project will finance the WWTP rehabilitation and expansion works that will result in land acquisition, involuntary
                      resettlement and temporary economic impacts. The WWTP site, though state-owned, is occupied by families and an
                      informal mineral extraction operation. These impacts are addressed in the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), which
                      covers 49 PAPs/areas including households with residents, land occupants, economic activities, workers and service
                      providers. The RAP was approved, and implementation began within the scope of Paraiba Project (P165683).
                      Cadaster, consultation and pre-negotiation have already been conducted with PAPs. RAP’s implementation is
                      expected to be completed before this project becomes effective. The PMU team has previous experience in
                      addressing and mitigating resettlement impacts and risks related to WWTP infrastructure. Commitment to preparing
                      a RAP Implementation Report included in the ESCP.


                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                                    Page 9 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS 6 is relevant for this Project. The WWTP discharges treated effluent near a mangrove area. While the Project aims
                      to improve effluent quality, there is a risk of altering the local ecosystem and affecting mangrove health. Particularly
                      regarding water management and the potential use of algaecides to control green and blue algae in drinking water
                      systems. If algaecides are used, products must comply with national legislation. The Project is not expected to
                      negatively impact natural resources or species and will not involve commercial forest harvesting. Instead, efficient
                      water use, and reuse may enhance natural resource management and resilience to drought. Project benefits should
                      outweigh environmental impacts, with mitigation measures included in WWTP design and bidding documents.
                      Expansion of the WWTP may affect a mangrove habitat. Plant design should minimize habitat disturbance and
                      enhance water quality. Although mangrove vegetation will not be removed, treated sewage discharge may affect
                      mangrove ecosystem water quality, potentially causing harmful algal blooms. The ESMP must address chemical,
                      hazardous, and solid waste controls. In addition, the design and operation of the WWTP will follow strict
                      environmental standards to protect sensitive habitats.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is not considered relevant at this stage because preliminary screening does not indicate the presence of
                      Indigenous Peoples meeting the criteria of ESS7 (paras 8 & 9) within the project’s potential area of influence. The
                      project focuses on improving water and sanitation services aimed at the general population. In the State of Paraíba,



Public Disclosure
                      the Indigenous Lands of the Potiguara and Potiguara de Monte-Mor are located in the coastal municipalities of Baía
                      da Traição, Marcação and Rio Tinto – which lay outside of the project’s area of intervention.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      This ESS is relevant. There is no indication, so far, that the Project works may interfere with known cultural resources,
                      however, the civil works nature may result in interference with historical and/or paleontological sites. The ‘chance
                      find’ procedures will be defined in accordance with requirements from IPHAN (Instituto de Patrimônio Histórico e
                      Artístico Nacional) and from the ESS8. The project will also include chance find procedures in all civil works contracts.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      Not currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                          In Part


                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                                The World Bank
                                Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                         TThe Project will partially rely on aspects of the Borrower's Framework that allow the achievement of outcomes that
                         are materially consistent with the relevant ESSs as found by the ongoing Overview Assessment of Brazil’s E&S
                         Framework (BESF).

                         Areas where the Project may rely on BESF include labor management; prevention and response to SEA/SH; access to
                         information and grievance redressing.

                         The partial use of the Borrower Framework is suggested based on assessments conducted during implementation of
                         previous operation, as well as on the report of the desk review assessment of the legal and institutional framework of
                         the Federative Republic of Brazil with respect to ESS2, ESS3, ESS6, and ESS8 at national and state level.



                         Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                         None

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     As noted earlier, the proposed Project will ensure continuity to the operation (IPF) currently underway.




Public Disclosure
                     The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) addressing improvements to wastewater services in the city of João Pessoa
                     (WWTP) was prepared and approved by the Bank under the project currently under implementation.

                     A draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared and is available for public consultation.

                     The draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) incorporates the Borrower’s following commitments to
                     address E&S potential risks and impacts associated with the proposed activities, outlining the following key actions to
                     be addressed:

                     •        Establish and maintain a Project Management Unit (PMU) with qualified staff and resources to manage
                     environmental, social, health, and safety risks and impacts of the project, including the appointment of a Social
                     Specialist, an Environmental Specialist, and a Social Communications Specialist.

                     •       Prepare and implement Environmental and Social Management Requirements as part of the Project
                     Operational Manual. This includes specific guidelines on environmental and social measures to be taken throughout the
                     project’s implementation.

                     •          Disclose the final SEP, incorporating feedback and outcomes from public consultations.

                     •          Operationalize the Project's Grievance Mechanism.



                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                     •     Conduct necessary institutional capacity-building training to enhance the environmental and social risk
                     management systems.

                     •       Update the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) in
                     João Pessoa and submit it to the Bank no later than 60 days after the project’s effectiveness date. Initial analysis
                     indicates that there are no significant gaps between the prepared ESMP and the Environmental and Social Framework
                     (ESF) requirements. However, the updated ESMP will strengthen provisions related to ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, and ESS6.
                     Further analysis will be conducted, and the ESMP will be revised as needed to ensure full alignment with ESF standards.
                     Implementation and monitoring will continue throughout the project’s duration.

                     •        The Borrower will prepare an independent dam safety assessment for the Gramame-Mamuaba and Marés
                     dams related to the project, in accordance with the Bank’s Good Practice Note (GPN) on dam safety. This assessment
                     will be submitted within 30 days of the project’s effectiveness date.

                     During project implementation, the Borrower will undertake additional environmental and social assessments and
                     develop management plans to address the risks and impacts associated with specific activities and contractors. The
                     following instruments will be prepared during the implementation phase:

                     •         Environmental and Social Management Plan for the Gramame Adductor Branch.

                     •     Environmental and Social Management Plan for the distribution system serving water supply systems in the




Public Disclosure
                     metropolitan region.

                     •         WWTP RAP Implementation Report.

                     •        Incorporate the recommendations from the independent dam safety assessment into the terms of reference
                     for the dam safety plans of the dams related to the Project, (Gramame, Mamuaba and Marés). Complete the safety
                     plans for the referred dams in accordance with ESS4, the BESF and World Bank dam safety best practices, no later than
                     3 years after the Project Effective Date.

                     All ESF instruments will remain publicly available on relevant websites, and feedback will be collected through an online
                     consultation platform.

                     The World Bank task team will assign one environmental specialist and one social development specialist, both of
                     whom are expected to conduct biannual implementation support missions. During Project implementation the Bank
                     will monitor the capacity of each implementing agency to carry out E&S risks management in a proportionate manner
                     to the project-related E&S risks, impacts and downstream effects.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank


                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                                   Page 12 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Paraiba Water Security Project (northeast Mpa Phase I) (P511557)



                      Task Team Leader:       Alfonso Alvestegui                    Title:         Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                   Specialist

                      Email:                  aalvestegui@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                           Alfonso Alvestegui

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                  Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                         Juliana Medeiros Paiva




Public Disclosure




                    Apr 20, 2026                                                                                               Page 13 of 13
