Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Morocco Ifahsa Pumped Hydropower Storage (PHS) Project(P511426)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 14-Aug-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01328




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Morocco Ifahsa Pumped Hydropower Storage (PHS) Project(P511426)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
Morocco                        P511426                     Morocco Ifahsa Pumped Hydropower Storage (PHS)
                                                           Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
MID EAST,NORTH                 02-Feb-2026                 15-May-2026                  Energy & Extractives
AFRICA,AFG,PAK
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Office National de          Office National de
Financing (IPF)                l'Électricité et de l'Eau   l'Électricité et de l'Eau
                               potable (ONEE)              potable (ONEE)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to enable higher integration of renewables generation in the Moroccan
transmission system by developing the Ifahsa PHS Plant.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  To be decided
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                       450.00

  Total Financing                                                                                            450.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               210.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                              210.00
  Non-World Bank Group Financing

                                                                                                                Page 1



                                                                                                        Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Morocco Ifahsa Pumped Hydropower Storage (PHS) Project(P511426)


        Trust Funds                                                                                                        30.00
           Clean Technology Fund                                                                                           30.00
        Other Sources                                                                                                    210.00
           African Development Bank                                                                                      210.00




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                              Concept Review Decision
High                                                                      The review did authorize the preparation to continue




    Other Decision (as needed)

    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context

    1. Morocco's energy sector is central to its economic growth and job creation agenda, and the proposed Project will
       support the country’s energy transition and security objectives by enabling the integration of a higher share of
       variable Renewable Energy (RE). Electricity consumption grew at 4 percent annually since 2010, reaching 45.7 TWh
       in 2024, highlighting the need to support rising demand while contributing to global climate efforts, including higher
       integration of RE projects led by private sector to the energy mix, leveraging the country's abundant solar and wind
       resources to reduce Morocco’s fossil fuel reliance, create jobs, and drive innovation. The proposed Ifahsa Pumped
       Hydropower Storage (PHS) Project (P511426 – The Project) will provide ancillary services to enhance the transmission
       system flexibility in balancing supply-demand and address renewables intermittency and therefore enable higher
       integration of wind and solar generation and will therefore enhance Morocco’s energy security through more reliance
       on domestic energy resources. The proposed Project complements larger World Bank Group (WBG) engagement in
       the energy sector to support necessary sector reforms and attract more private sector investment in renewables.
    Sectoral and Institutional Context
    2. Morocco has adopted ambitious climate targets to reach carbon neutrality by 2050. In December 2021, Morocco
       submitted its Long-Term Low Emission Development Strategy (LT-LEDS) to the United Nations Framework Convention
       on Climate Change (UNFCC), which aims for 80 percent share of RE in power generation mix by 2050 and explores a
       net-zero scenario for the power sector by that date. Furthermore, Morocco launched, during COP28, its National Low
       Carbon Strategy 2050 (Stratégie Nationale Bas Carbone - SNBC) with the aim of exploring net-zero emission scenarios
       targeting carbon neutrality by 2050. The SNBC1 net-zero scenario foresees a share of 96 percent for RE in power
       generation mix by 2050. Morocco intends to reach this objective mainly through coal phase-out (the country has
       joined the Power Past Coal Alliance) and the development of its RE resources, largely led by private sector. This

1
    The SNBC was issued in December 2023 and the Executive Summary of the SNBC was published in November 2024.

                                                                                                                                 Page 2



                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Morocco Ifahsa Pumped Hydropower Storage (PHS) Project(P511426)


        energy transition would increase energy security and diversification and bring significant economic benefits to the
        Moroccan economy, including a higher GDP growth relative to a status quo scenario, improved fiscal balances, and
        potential job creation of 28,0002 positions annually through 2050.
    3. Morocco possesses excellent RE resources capable of meeting domestic needs and decarbonizing its economy.
       Since the adoption of the National Energy Strategy in 2009 and the Government’s New Development Model (NDM),
       Morocco has made substantial progress in establishing regulations to boost RE generation, including two laws in
       February 2023 to facilitate third-party access for RE producers to the transmission grid. In 2024, RE installed capacity
       reached 5,337 MW, making up 45 percent of total installed capacity but only meeting 25 percent of national
       electricity demand. Wind energy leads with 2,360 MW, surpassing hydroelectric power at 2,120 MW, while solar
       energy remains modest at 857 MW. By the end of 2025, renewable capacity is expected to increase by 894 MW,
       reaching 49 percent of total capacity, driven by OCP’s3 photovoltaic plants and private sector developments. ONEE
       plans to add 12,445 MW of renewable capacity by 2030, making renewables 64 percent of installed capacity and 59
       percent of electricity generation, and potentially reducing coal's share to 26 percent of electricity generation.
    4. Developing the power system necessary to integrate high level of RE requires substantial investment in grid
       infrastructure expansion to build flexibility and resilience that will allow for higher penetration of RE sources.
       Morocco aims to invest in power system flexibility solutions, such as energy storage systems and interconnections,
       to enable reaching 80 percent of RE capacity by 2050 as targeted under ST-LEDS. To this end, ONEE has initiated a
       program to develop 1000 MW of hydropower pumped storage by 2030. This includes the recently commissioned 350
       MW Abdelmoumen plant in Agadir, a 350 MW plant at El Menzel currently under development, and the Ifahsa PHS
       plant under the proposed Project. Additional storage solutions (including PHS and battery energy storage systems)
       are in the identification stage. ONEE also plans to expand its regional interconnections and pilot the implementation
       of smart grid, advanced metering infrastructure and load frequency control and automatic generation control to
       complement storage investment and improve the overall operational efficiency of the Moroccan electricity network.
    5. PHS is a mature technology for energy storage and balancing electricity supply and demand, ensuring power
       system stability and reliability. PHS functions by elevating water to an upper reservoir during off-peak periods using
       grid electricity and releasing it through turbines to generate electricity during peak demand, providing economic
       benefits through price arbitrage and reducing reliance on inefficient thermal power plants during high-demand
       periods. PHS can offer numerous ancillary services to the grid, such as peak-shaving and load-leveling, provision of
       spinning reserve, black-start, voltage and frequency control. However, PHS projects are capital-intensive, with limited
       private sector interest due to challenges in monetizing ancillary benefits, and perceived high risks (construction,
       hydrology, market, etc.) that would result in higher tariffs, leading to its development in many cases by system
       operators like ONEE. PHS can provide ONEE with a valuable and economical means of balancing the power system
       and allow more RE projects to connect to the grid. It is expected that the proposed Project will enable the integration
       of up to 1.5 GW of new RE projects into the grid.
    Relationship to CPF
    6. The proposed Project is expected to contribute to two of the three Focus Areas of the Morocco FY19-25 Country
        Partnership Framework (CPF), as adjusted through the Performance and Learning Review exercise, namely (i) Pillar
        1: promoting job creation by the private sector, and (ii) Pillar 3: supporting the climate transition, within which one
        CPF objectives is to strengthen adaptation to climate change and resilience to natural disasters. The proposed Project
        will strengthen resilience of the Moroccan grid to enable higher penetration of variable RE sources and reduce
        reliance on thermal generation. The proposed Project is also aligned with priority decarbonization pathways
        considered by Morocco’s CCDR to put the economy on a low-carbon and resilient development path. The CCDR

2
    Job creation and skills development during the energy transition – Morocco, Worl bank study, January 2024.
3 OCP Group is one of the largest phosphate and fertilizer companies in the world, owned by the Moroccan Government and the Banque Populaire du Maroc.




                                                                                                                                                         Page 3



                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Morocco Ifahsa Pumped Hydropower Storage (PHS) Project(P511426)


    estimates that Morocco could reach a net-zero emissions by the 2050s by taking advantage of its abundant
    competitive RE resources. The proposed Project will contribute to operationalizing the CCDR recommendations by
    enabling integration of higher level of RE into the grid. The proposed Project is aligned with the World Bank PCE
    mandate as it will enable private capital investments for additional RE projects to be integrated into the grid.
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to enable higher integration of renewables generation in the Moroccan
transmission system by developing the Ifahsa PHS Plant.


 Key Results (From PCN)
7. The PDO indicators are expected to be:
        •   Renewable energy capacity enabled (MW).
        •   Amount of private capital enabled (US$).
        •   Net greenhouse gas (GHG) emission savings (MtCO2e/year).

8. Intermediate indicators include:
        •   Peaking capacity added (MW).
        •   Power storage capacity added (GWh)

D. Concept Description

9. The proposed Project will finance the preparation, construction, and commissioning of the Ifahsa PHS plant with an
   expected capacity of 300 MW. During off-peak hours, the plant will use dispatched renewable electricity from the
   grid to pump water from the lower reservoir to the upper reservoir. During peak hours, it will generate electricity to
   meet the peak demand in the Morocco’s grid system, by conveying the stored water from the upper reservoir to the
   lower reservoir through hydraulic turbines. the PHS plant will be connected by 400 kV transmission to the national
   grid.
10. Located 14 km from Chefchaouen in northern Morocco, near the Laou valley and south of Tetouan, the Ifahsa PHS
    plant will feature two reversible pump-turbine units of 150 MW each, operating with a maximum flow of 44 m³/s in
    turbine mode and 37 m³/s in pumping mode. The plant is designed to absorb 690 GWh of energy and generate around
    550 GWh per year (80 percent efficiency). The proposed Project includes a higher and lower basin, each with a
    capacity of 793,000 m³, an underground plant housing the reversible units with a combined flow of 2 x 22 m³/s under
    a net head of 753 m, and a water supply circuit comprising both underground and aerial structures. The lower
    reservoir is planned to be situated near the Oued Laou River, spanning an area of 6 hectares. The upper reservoir will
    be constructed at the summit of the site, positioned 753 meters above the lower reservoir, and will cover an area of
    5.8 hectares. Both reservoirs will be of the rockfill type and lined with geomembranes, providing an active storage
    capacity of approximately 800,000 cubic meters to support the daily operations of the power plant. The water will
    be pumped in a closed loop system with only limited appoint per year to cover for evaporation.
11. The proposed Project will play a pivotal role in enhancing the integration of new solar and wind generation projects
    into the national grid, thereby reducing reliance on fossil-fuel-based generation. This multiplier effect will result in
    significant greenhouse gas emission reductions, firmly positioning the proposed Project at the heart of Morocco’s
    environmental and climate contribution.



                                                                                                                        Page 4



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Morocco Ifahsa Pumped Hydropower Storage (PHS) Project(P511426)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                           Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                               No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                         No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
  Noreddine Citroen
  Senior Energy Specialist

  Lucine Flor Lominy
  Senior Energy Specialist

  Anas Benbarka
  Lead Energy Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Office National de l'Électricité et de l'Eau potable (ONEE)
  Tarik Hamane
  General Director
  dgsecretariat@onee.ma


                                                                                             Page 5



                                                                                     Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Morocco Ifahsa Pumped Hydropower Storage (PHS) Project(P511426)


Implementing Agencies
 Office National de l'Électricité et de l'Eau potable (ONEE)
 Asmaa Sghiouar
 Head of financing division
 sghiouar@onee.ma

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                      Noreddine Citroen, Lucine Flor Lominy, Anas Benbarka

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                 Husam Mohamed Beides                  07-Jul-2025

Country Director:                         Mouna Hamden                          14-Aug-2025




Note to Task Team: This is the end of document. No further content should be added. Delete this note when
finalizing the document.




                                                                                                               Page 6



                                                                                                       Official Use Only
