Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Sep-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01384




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)        Operation ID                   Operation Name
Brazil                          P511557                        Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I)
Region                          Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date         Practice Area (Lead)
LATIN AMERICA AND               01-Dec-2025                    30-Mar-2026                     Water
CARIBBEAN
Financing Instrument            Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Investment Project              State Government of            AESA - State Water
Financing (IPF)                 Paraiba                        Resources Management
                                                               Executive Agency - Agência
                                                               Executiva de Gestão das
                                                               Águas, CAGEPA - State
                                                               Water and Sanitation
                                                               Company - Companhia de
                                                               Água e Esgotos da Paraíba,
                                                               SEIRH - State Secretariat
                                                               for Infrastructure and
                                                               Water Resources

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To (i) increase water security in the State of Paraiba; and (ii) improve the efficiency and reliability of water and
wastewater services.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                       Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                 Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                                 73.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                      73.00
                of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                      50.00


                                                                                                                         Page 1



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)



   Financing Gap                                                                                                      0.00

 DETAILS
   World Bank Group Financing
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                    50.00
   Non-World Bank Group Financing
     Counterpart Funding                                                                                             23.00
       Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                                                     23.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                       Concept Review Decision
Moderate                                                           The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1.      The Northeast of Brazil experienced relative solid economic performance over the last two decades. The
Northeast of Brazil is a region made up of nine states (Alagoas, Sergipe, Bahia, Pernambuco, Paraíba, Rio Grande do Norte,
Ceará, Piauí, and Maranhão). The region is home to 57.1 million, 70 per cent of whom live in urban areas, mainly along
the coast. The rural population is 12.1 million (IBGE 2022) and has been decreasing over time. The population is estimated
to peak before 2040. The economy is mainly based on services (72 per cent of GDP) as in Brazil overall. Agriculture accounts
for about 7 per cent of GDP, the highest among Brazil’s regions, and while relatively small in comparison to the services
and industrial sectors, it is critical to the livelihood of the rural population where most households depend on family
farming. Economic growth in the region has been solid over the past 20 years (2.2 percent/year), higher than Brazil’s
average at 2 percent/year. These results reflect recent progress stemming from the expansion of social policies,
particularly income transfer programs, as well as the recovery of both the formal and informal job markets.
2.      Despite improvements in jobs and living conditions, the region is still lagging the rest of Brazil in many socio-
economic indicators. Economic growth has generated jobs, increased per capita income, and reduced inequalities and
poverty, as well as improvements in the Human Development Index (HDI). Between 2012 and 2024, the average household
per capita income grew by 26.7 per cent, poverty decreased by 8 percentage points to reach 36.9 per cent and extreme
poverty dropped from 14.3 per cent in 2012 to 6.6 per cent in 2023. The Gini Index calculated for the Northeast region in
2024 was 0.502; the lowest value in the series that began in 2012. The unemployment rate in 2024 was 9.0 per cent, the
lowest since 2015. Despite progress, the region shows many economic indicators lower than the national average in 2024
with a poverty rate of 36.9 per cent compared to 23.4 per cent, an extreme poverty at 6.6 percent compared to 3.5 per



                                                                                                                          Page 2



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


cent, and household per capita income at US$ 242.00 compared to US$ 370.6. On the other hand, its Gini coefficient at
0.502 outpaces national averages at 0.506 (IBGE/FVG/IBRE).
3.      To address these persistent socio-economic challenges, the nine States of the Northeast created the Northeast
Sustainable Development Interstate Consortium – Consórcio Nordeste in 2019, fostering integration and cooperation,
with the purpose of promoting sustainable development, managing services of common interest, and coordinating public
policy agreements, among other initiatives. This builds on several policies, mostly from the federal government,
implemented over the past decades to promote social and economic development in the region. Among the federal
government agencies operating in the Northeast, the Superintendence for the Development of the Northeast (SUDENE)
is responsible for promoting economic and social growth in the region and the formulation of the Regional Development
Plan for the Northeast (PRDNE).
 Sectoral and Institutional Context
4.       Brazil’s Northeast region faces persistent water security challenges that continue to hinder inclusive and
sustainable development. Its semi-arid climate, limited water availability, and high rainfall variability lead to frequent
droughts and floods, causing water, food, and energy shortages and driving rural-urban migration. Water quality is also a
concern, especially in urban and industrial areas with low wastewater treatment coverage and poor quality groundwater
in most of the region due to brackish conditions and salinization along the coast. Climate change is expected to worsen
these vulnerabilities through rising temperatures, reduced rainfall, more severe droughts, and sea level rise, the latter
threatening water and sanitation infrastructure in coastal cities. The National Water Agency (Agência Nacional de Águas
e Saneamento Básico, ANA) estimates that, without improvements in water management practices, 20 million people —
37 percent of the population— and 53 percent of agricultural and industrial GDP (around R$200 billion1) could face water
shortages by 20352. Between 2000 and 2014, droughts affected 33 million people and caused losses over USD 11 billion,
while floods impacted 3.27 million people and cost USD 4.37 billion between 2000 and 2023, especially in coastal areas 3.
This context makes the challenge of providing reliable water supply to people and the economy, managing drought and
flood risks, while safeguarding the environment increasingly complex and costly.
5.      Despite progress over the past decades in reducing extreme vulnerability to droughts and water scarcity, much
remains to be done to achieve water security. Major achievements include the development of critical infrastructure
such as dams, canal, pipelines, inter-basin transfers like the São Francisco Integration Project (PISF4) to meet the increasing
urban demands and, to a lesser extent, expand irrigated areas and mitigate flood risks. However, post-construction
management and financing models are often inadequate, compromising infrastructure effectiveness, longevity, and
safety. Apart from water supply augmentation, investment and incentives to improve water use efficiency and reduce
pollution have not received enough attention, hastening the need to develop costly new supplies. Effective water
governance has been constrained by insufficient funding, poor coordination, and limited technical capacity.
6.         Notable progress has also been made in increasing water supply and sanitation (WSS) coverage, but the region
is still lagging most other Brazil’s regions, and significant gaps persists in rural and peri-urban rural water access and
basic sanitation overall. Approximately 13.4 million people (23 percent of the Northeast’s population) lack access to
potable water, and 37.8 million (69 percent) are without sewerage systems. Moreover, a small share of the sewerage
collected is treated, a major cause of inland and coastal pollution. Service performance also lags, with non-revenue water
at 46.7 percent and energy consumption at 0.78 kWh/m³, compared to 0.61 kWh/m³ in the South. The region has the

1 The share of the services sector GDP at risk of water shortage is not included and is expected to be high considering that services account for about

70 per cent of GDP and are mostly in urban areas, where water shortages affect 37 per cent of the population.
2 Water shortages is when water demand is higher than water availability.
3 EM-DAT: The Emergency Events database – Université Catholique de Louvain – CRED, Brussels, Belgium.
4 The São Francisco River Integration Project (PISF) is a major federal water infrastructure investment designed to enhance water security and

promote sustainable development in Brazil’s semi-arid Northeast.

                                                                                                                                                  Page 3



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


highest rate of intermittent supply, with over half of households affected. In remote rural areas and poorer urban
communities, the situation is even more dire: rural communities often rely on water trucks5 and lack reliable sanitation.
Although the recently approved sectoral framework6 assigned ANA a new regulatory role, WSS regulation remains
fragmented and generally weak, with 23 agencies operating across the region.
7.       The state of Paraíba ranks in terms of GDP in 19th among the 27 Brazilian federative units and 6th within the
Northeast region, but in 26th when considering GDP per capita in 2021. It has a population of 3,974,687, with
approximately 20.4 percent of people living in rural areas, and 47.4 percent living in poverty in 2023. The HDI in 2021
ranked 21st among the 27 Brazilian federative units. The biome Caatinga dominates the semi-arid region and spans 193
of the state’s 223 municipalities, covering 92 percent of its territory, showing greater social vulnerability.
8.      In Paraíba, climate change affects the well-being of the population, the economy, and the environment, through
increased droughts, floods, and water scarcity risks. Rainfall patterns are a key climatic feature across Paraíba. The semi-
arid region is characterized by low and irregular rainfall,7 whereas the coastal region experiences higher precipitation
throughout the year.8 Climate change studies suggest rising temperature extremes, a reduction in average rainfall, and an
increase in the number and frequency of dry days.9
9.      The João Pessoa Metropolitan Region (RMJP) is comprised of 12 municipalities in Paraíba, with an estimated
total population of 1,380,923. The state capital, João Pessoa, accounts for 64.4% of the population. According to the 2022
census, it was the fastest-growing capital among Brazil's 20 most populous cities, with a 15.3% increase in 12 years. The
RMJP's economy is strongly driven by specialized services and tourism, with the Cabo Branco Tourist Hub standing out.
Other notable sectors include commerce, a concentration of public facilities and services, and, in the agricultural sector,
sugarcane production and aquaculture.
10.      The RMJP faces significant challenges in water supply and sanitation. The water supply system in the RMJP faces
significant challenges, primarily due to high levels of water losses in the distribution networks —currently estimated at
33% (CAGEPA, 2024)— and increasing demand driven by urban expansion and the growth of tourism, including the
development of resorts, hotels, and water parks. Sanitation services also face critical gaps. The sewage collection and
treatment coverage rate stand at 69% (SNIS, 2022), underscoring the need for substantial investments to meet the
universalization targets established by Brazil’s sanitation legal framework and contribute to an enabling environment for
economic growth.
 Relationship to CPF
11.     The Project is aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Brazil CPF (FY24–FY28). It aligns with
the existing CPF Higher Level Objectives (HLOs) of: (i) great productivity and employment; (ii) greater inclusion of the poor
and underserved populations; and (iii) greener economy with reduced vulnerability to climate chocks.




5In     Brazil,    there     are      2.1      million     people      who      have     water     trucks     as     their     main       form     of
access to water, with 89.2% of this population living in the Northeast region - IBGE (2022 demographic census).
6 Law N. 14,026/2020 known as the New Legal Framework for Sanitation in Brazil.
7 In the Semi-arid region, average annual rainfall ranges from 330 to 1,000 mm. This rainfall is concentrated within a short ‘winter’ season, which

rarely exceeds four months per year (generally occurring between January and May in the westernmost areas of the Semi-arid region of Paraíba, and
somewhat later in the more eastern parts of this region). The dry season, or ‘summer’, is very pronounced in this area.
8 In the Zona da Mata region, total annual rainfall is higher, ranging from 1,100 to 1,800 mm. There is also some rainfall seasonality in the Zona da

Mata, with the rainiest period, or ‘winter’, generally extending from February to August, although months without rain are rare.
9 Sources: (i) MARENGO, J. A.; CUNHA, A. P.; NOBRE, C. A. Assessing drought in the drylands of northeast Brazil under regional warming exceeding

4°C. Natural Hazards, v.103, p. 2589-2611; 2020. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-020-04097-3

                                                                                                                                                Page 4



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


12.      The Project will support Brazil’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) and National Adaptation Plan (NAP).
In the latest update of NDC,10 Brazil pledged to reduce emissions by 48 percent compared to 2005 levels by 2025 and by
53 percent by 2030. Also, Brazil aims to achieve climate neutrality by 2050.
13.      The proposed Project is aligned with the Bank’s Private Capital Mobilized (PCM) strategy, recognizing that
private sector participation is critical to advancing water security. It will foster this participation through: (i) strengthening
the enabling environment for private investments, with a focus on building the capacity of entities responsible for
structuring and regulating Public Private Partnerships (PPP); and (ii) leveraging private sector engagement in the
procurement of goods and services.
 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
14.      The proposed Project Development Objectives (PDO) of the new operation are to increase water security in
the State of Paraiba and improve the efficiency and reliability of water and wastewater services.

  Key Results (From PCN)
15.      The proposed PDO indicators are the following:
                a. PDO Indicator 1. People provided with water, sanitation and/or hygiene, of which 100% is safely
                   managed -scorecard indicator-.
                   Unit: Beneficiaries. Disaggregated by gender, and youth.
                   Rationale: This climate change (CC) related indicator will measure the number of people who benefit
                   from new or rehabilitated service that improves hours of supply, continuity, NRW reduction and the
                   new WWTP.
                b. PDO Indicator 2. Volume of water recovered as a result of non-revenue water control actions in the
                   JPMR - cumulative value.
                   Unit: Cubic meters (m3). Baseline and target: To be defined during appraisal.
                   Rationale: This CC related indicator reflects improvements in operational efficiency through
                   sectorization and infrastructure upgrades.
                c. PDO Indicator 3. Volume of pollution loads (BOD) discharges reduced in water bodies in the JPMR
                   (Tones per year).
                   Unit: Tones per year.
                   Rationale: This CC related indicator captures environmental and public health benefits of the WWTP.
                d. PDO Indicator 4. Water resources management instruments strengthened.
                   Unit: Qualitative assessment or composite index
                   Rationale: Reflects progress in improvements of water resources instruments (information systems,
                   water licenses and charges, classification of water bodies).
                e. PDO Indicator 5. People with enhanced resilience to hydrological risks - scorecard indicator.
                     Unit: Number of people
                     Rationale: Refers to individuals who benefit from interventions that reduce their vulnerability to droughts
 D. Concept Description
16.     The Project will constitute the Phase 1 of the Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) ‘Integrated Water
Security Program for the Northeast of Brazil’. On March 27, 2025, the Committee for External Financing (COFIEX)


10 Brazil. 2023. Adjustments to the National Determined Contribution to the Paris Agreement under the UNFCCC.



                                                                                                                                   Page 5



                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


approved the State of Paraíba's request for a new water project. The Project's design will align with the MPA's Theory of
Change, PrDOs, and prioritize institutions, instruments, and infrastructure. Notably, the Integrated Water Security
Program for the Northeast was launched in Joao Pessoa with the support of the State Government in June 2024, reflecting
the need for a comprehensive regional approach to water security. Phase 1 of the MPA comprises priority initiatives aimed
at improving water security across Paraíba, strengthening key public sector water institutions, and constructing essential
infrastructure such as a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP), the sectorisation of the water supply distribution system,
and the construction of a water transmission main for the Gramame system—all serving the RMJP.
17.     The Project will build on the on-going Paraiba Water Security Project (PWSP). The Paraiba Improving Water
Resources Management and Services Provision Project (P165683), or Paraiba Water Security Project (PWSP) was approved
in 2019 and is underway. It includes actions on WRM, security of dams, the construction of water mains, one contract for
the sectorization of the water supply network of RMJP, wastewater collection infrastructure for RMJP, and institutional
strengthening of the state water utility.
18.      Project Beneficiaries. The Project is expected to benefit the entire population of the State of Paraíba.
Strengthening WRM policies and instruments will enhance water availability and quality across the state. Investments in
sanitation infrastructure—including increased wastewater treatment capacity and the sectorization of water distribution
networks—will directly benefit residents of the João Pessoa Metropolitan Region and the economic growth of the region,
which has a population of approximately 1,250,000, according to 2022 data from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and
Statistics (IBGE). Additionally, studies and activities focused on rural sanitation management models will reach the entire
rural population of the state, estimated at 812,220 inhabitants (IBGE, 2022 Census), contributing to improved service
delivery and sustainability in rural areas.
19.     Project Cost, Duration and Financing. The estimated total Project cost is US$73 million, to be financed with a US$
50 million IBRD loan and US$23 million of counterpart funding. The proposed lending instrument is an IPF to be
implemented over a five-year period. The Borrower will be the State Government of Paraíba. Project costs by component
and financing arrangements are presented in Table 1.

                        Table 1. Project Costs and Source of Financing (amounts in US$ thousands)
                                 Component                                    Project cost   IBRD Loan     Counterpart
                                                                                                             funding
    Component 1: Integrated Water Resources Management                           3.5             3.5            --
    Component 2: Water and Sanitation Services                                   69.3           46.3           23.0
    Component 3: Project Management                                              0.2             0.2
                                     Total                                       73.0           50.0          23.0


20.      Component 1. Integrated Water Resources Management (US$3.5 million financed by IBRD). This component
aims to contribute to proactive WRM in the state by strengthening the state WRM institution and consolidating key
management instruments related to water quantity, quality, and drought resilience. It will focus on expanding surface and
groundwater monitoring, fostering dialogue on the costs and financial sustainability of the water management system,
improving water licenses and charges, and establishing water quality standards through a participatory process with
society, along with the necessary actions to achieve those standards. The component will also focus on increasing the
state’s capacity for drought management through increased monitoring and warning mechanisms for implementation of
adequate measures, and the proposition of a state water reuse policy.
21.      Component 2. Water Supply and Sanitation Services (US$69.3 million: US$46.3 million provided by IBRD; US$23
million in counterpart funding). This component is designed to advance the modernization and expansion of water supply
and sanitation services, supporting the state water utility (CAGEPA), the state water services regulatory agency and a


                                                                                                                         Page 6



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


recently created unit that will lead the development of a national strategy and plan to support rural water supply and
sanitation in the state. It encompasses the implementation of water infrastructure projects that will enhance the quality
of life for residents, improve environmental outcomes, and promote economic growth within the state, particularly in the
RMJP region.
22.      Component 3. Project Management (US$0.2 million financed by IBRD). This component will support the Project
Management Unit (Unidade de Gerenciamento do Projeto, UGP) in strengthening its technical and administrative capacity.
Activities will include the hiring of consultants and the provision of independent audit services to ensure effective project
implementation, monitoring, and compliance with fiduciary and safeguard requirements.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




23.     This Project builds on previous efforts to strengthen integrated water resources management and improve water
and wastewater services in the RMJP. It will provide technical support and invest in water and sanitation infrastructure,
including sewage system upgrades in João Pessoa, Cabedelo, and Conde, aiming to reduce wastewater spills and enhance
treatment for local ecosystems. Component 1 offers technical assistance and small monitoring initiatives with minimal
environmental risks. Component 2 focuses on sanitation, including a 36 km Gramame adductor system, expansion of the
Baixo Paraíba WWTP, water supply optimization in João Pessoa’s metro area, and rural water studies. Component 3 is
dedicated to project management and ensuring social and environmental compliance.
24.     Activities mirror the current Paraiba Water Security Project (PWSP), leveraging lessons learned for improved
environmental management. All works will occur in urban or peri-urban areas, avoiding sensitive zones and significant
biodiversity threats. Construction ranges from simple to moderately complex, with WWTP work expected to last about 18
months. Impacts are projected to be local, temporary, and manageable, with no cumulative negative effects. However,
WWTP rehabilitation is expected to improve mangrove health but could alter how local populations use the ecosystem.
WWTP design and procurement should adhere to strict environmental standards, national regulations, NASs, and
requirements for effluent, sludge management, mangrove protection, and dam safety.
25.      The Project involves investments to improve water supply and sanitation services in the RMJP and strengthen
water security in the State of Paraíba, Brazil. While the Project aims to improve living conditions and environmental
quality, it carries potential for some social impacts. The construction of the WWTP and water supply infrastructure will
require land acquisition. The scale of these impacts was already identified in the preparation of the Resettlement Action
Plan, in the previous operation, and has already received No Objection by the Bank.
26.    The expansion of the WWTP will be located on land owned by the State, but currently occupied by families and
the mineral extraction industry—quarries 01 and 04—is currently operating, albeit irregular. The RAP covers 49 affected

                                                                                                                         Page 7



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


areas, including: 9 households with residents; 2 households with vacant properties; 5 land squatters; 3 economic activities;
29 workers; 1 service provider. The project’s focus on improving water and sanitation services is expected to have positive
impacts on public health. However, potential risks related to community health and safety during construction and
operation of the WWTP. The mitigation measures will be included in the C-ESMPs.
27.      A large labor influx is not expected; despite this, these risks will be managed through the (i) Worker Codes of
Conduct (ii) worker training and community sensitization; (iii) accessible Grievance Mechanism (GM); (iv) contractor
management clauses and community health and safety management measures. The Northeast region faces
socioeconomic challenges, including high poverty rates and water scarcity. These contextual factors can exacerbate social
risks associated with the project. The SEP will be prepared to ensure meaningful consultation with affected communities
and address their concerns.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Luis Alfonso Alvestegui Justiniano
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Paula Pedreira de Freitas de Oliveira
   Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  State Government of Paraiba
  Joao Azevedo Lins Filho
  Governor of Paraíba State
  spg@palacio.pb.gov.br

 Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                                        Page 8



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Paraiba Water Security Project 2 (Northeast MPA Phase I) (P511557)


 AESA - State Water Resources Management Executive Agency - Agência Executiva de Gestão das Águas
 Porfirio `Loureiro Porfirio `Loureiro
 President
 porfirioloureiro@aesa.pb.gov.br

 CAGEPA - State Water and Sanitation Company - Companhia de Água e Esgotos da Paraíba
 Marcus Vinicius Neves
 President - Director
 marcus.neves@cagepa.pb.gov.br

 SEIRH - State Secretariat for Infrastructure and Water Resources
 Virgiane da Silva Melo
 SECRETÁRIA EXECUTIVA DE ESTADO DA INFRAESTRUTURA E RECURSOS HÍDRICOS
 virgiane.amaral@seirhma.pb.gov.br
 Deusdete Queiroga Filho
 State Secretary for Infrastructure,Water Resources-SECRETÁRIO DE ESTADO DA INFRAESTRUTURA, DOS REC
 deusdete.queiroga@seirhma.pb.gov.br

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Luis Alfonso Alvestegui Justiniano, Paula Pedreira de Freitas de Oliveira

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               David Michaud                            02-Sep-2025

Country Director:                       Jorge A. Coarasa                         18-Sep-2025




                                                                                                                    Page 9



                                                                                                           Official Use Only
