Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 01/30/2026 | Report No: ESRSA04717




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 31, 2026                                                                          Page 1 of 12
                                The World Bank
                                Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P511492                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      DJIRESA                    2026

                     Operation Name            DJIBOUTI GROUNDWATER FOR RESILIENCE AND WATER SUPPLY PROJECT

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Djibouti                  Djibouti                                MID EAST,NORTH             Water
                                                                                       AFRICA,AFG,PAK

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Economy       Intergovernmental Authority on          25-Jan-2026                16-Mar-2026
                     and Finance,              Development (IGAD), Ministry of
                     Intergovernmental         Agriculture, Water, Fisheries,
                     Authority on              Livestock, in charge of Halieutic
                     Development (IGAD)        Resources



Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     20-Jan-2026               31,500,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To increase the sustainable access to and management of groundwater by people in rural areas of Djibouti


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     With the DJIBOUTI GROUNDWATER RESILIENCE AND WATER SUPPLY PROJECT (P511492) Djibouti will be joining as
                     phase II the MPA Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience Project (P174867), which started with Kenya, Ethiopia,
                     Somalia, and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD). This regional project aims to increase
                     sustainable access and management of groundwater resources in the Horn of Africa's borderlands, addressing urgent
                     water supply needs and fostering transboundary cooperation. The project’s development objective is to increase the

                    Jan 31, 2026                                                                                                  Page 2 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)



                     sustainable access and management of groundwater in rural areas of Djibouti through investments that pair
                     infrastructure with robust operations and maintenance (O&M) arrangements. The project comprises four components:
                     (i) delivering inclusive groundwater services to priority areas via rehabilitation and construction of potable water
                     systems, complemented by fit-for-purpose O&M models (such as operator contracts, service-level agreements, and
                     community-based maintenance with clear accountability and financing mechanisms); (ii) generating groundwater
                     information and strengthening regional and national institutions, including improved hydrogeological mapping,
                     monitoring networks, data systems, and capacity building for policy, regulation, and asset management; (iii) project
                     management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), knowledge management, and learning; and (iv) a Contingent
                     Emergency Response Component (CERC) to enable rapid response to eligible crises and emergencies. Expected
                     outcomes include improved and reliably maintained groundwater access for communities, strengthened regional and
                     national groundwater management institutions capable of overseeing asset management and O&M, professionalized
                     operation and maintenance of rural water supply to reduce downtime and extend asset life, enhanced cooperation
                     among participating countries through IGAD-facilitated platforms and knowledge exchange, and increased resilience to
                     water scarcity driven by climate variability and population growth.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Ensuring universal access to drinking water has long been a major challenge for Djibouti, due to its harsh climatic
                     conditions, weak Operation and Maintenance (O&M) practices, and traditional heavy dependence on a single
                     resource—groundwater—which is increasingly overexploited and deteriorating in quality. Domestic demand accounts
                     for 84% of total annual water use. While urban areas have benefited from substantial investments, including



Public Disclosure
                     desalination plants and the Ethiopia-Djibouti water transfer pipeline, rural communities lag, with only 47 percent of the
                     rural population having access to basic drinking water, compared to 83 percent in urban centers. Rural sanitation
                     coverage remains critically low, with less than 25% of households having access to improved sanitation facilities, and
                     open defecation rates in rural areas of the country are high. These challenges are further exacerbated by poor practice
                     in operations and maintenance (O&M): about 30 percent of rural and semi-urban water points are out of service and 90
                     percent of the rural population still relies on the unwieldy manual water lifting, which provides minimal sanitary
                     protection. Furthermore, low levels of community contribution to O&M costs constrain the system’s ability to
                     implement necessary improvements and ensure long-term sustainability. Water management in Djibouti faces
                     significant challenges due to fragmented institutional responsibilities, limited human and financial capacity, and the
                     absence of a strategic plan for water resources.

                     Beyond access constraints, groundwater depletion is severe with annual abstraction levels reaching 133 percent of
                     renewable resources, compared to 7 percent in Ethiopia and 18 percent in Kenya. Many rural communities rely on
                     shallow aquifers that are highly vulnerable to seasonality and drought; during the 2008–2011 drought, 80% of
                     community wells failed, underscoring this risk. Salinity levels are also high, exceeding 900 milligrams per liter in more
                     than half of boreholes. Climate change has been identified as a key driver of increased groundwater salinity in Djibouti,
                     through sea level rise, and changes to the hydrological regime.

                     Djibouti’s population is very urbanized (79% urban, 21% rural). Livelihoods depend on agropastoralism and nomadic
                     herding. However, deep inequalities persist, with 21% of the population below the national poverty line and 44% below
                     the international lower-middle-income threshold. Only 47% of the rural population has access to basic drinking water,
                     forcing many to rely on unsafe sources. Women and children bear the burden of water collection, spending hours daily

                    Jan 31, 2026                                                                                                     Page 3 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)



                     fetching water, limiting education and economic opportunities. On average, women and girls walk between 3km and 5
                     km daily and up to 6 km during droughts to fetch water. It increases the risk for injury and accidents and risks related to
                     gender-based violence (GBV) including sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH). Despite their critical
                     role in securing water for the household, women’s involvement in groundwater management at community level
                     remains limited, due to persistent cultural norms, high illiteracy rates, and limited representation in decision-making
                     bodies. Currently, approximately 40 percent of water committee members are registered as women; however, their
                     participation and representation in leadership roles such as President, Vice President, Secretary General, or Treasurer
                     remains very limited.

                     Nomadic communities face extreme water insecurity due to their mobility and reliance on scarce groundwater. Much of
                     the rural population in the borderland areas, including in Djibouti rely on cross-border pastoral livelihoods/nomadic
                     herding, some of whom may meet the criteria of Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                     Traditional Local Communities (IP/SSAHUTLCs) per ESS7. The area has been relatively stable among water users,
                     including cross border users are, nevertheless given water scarcity for human and animal consumption, there is
                     nevertheless potential for conflict.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries, Livestock in Charge of Halieutic Resources (MAEPE-RH) will be responsible
                     for supporting the implementation of all project components, except regional activities per Annex 2 in the project
                     appraisal document. A new Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established and housed within MAEPE -RH. Project




Public Disclosure
                     management will be supervised by the Ministry, and all fiduciary aspects of the project will be centralized in this PIU,
                     which will also handle procurement and environmental and social risk management for all project activities. The PIU will
                     implement the project in close collaboration with existing institutions at the regional level, the latter of which are
                     mainly responsible for regional technical assistance activities. The PIU will coordinate with all beneficiary agencies to
                     ensure coherent implementation while maintaining centralized oversight of environmental and social alignment with
                     the ESF and ESCP.

                     MAEPE -RH has experience with donor-funded projects, including WB projects under the ESF and under the operational
                     policies (safeguards). They have implemented the now closed (December 2025) Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis
                     Response Project (PURCSA) (P178988), a 20 million USD emergency response to the food security crisis, with a
                     substantial ESRC, approved in October 2022, and executed with the Ministry of Social Affairs and Solidarity (MASS), and
                     the 15 million (USD) Djibouti Agri-Food Value Chain Development Project (PAFAD) (P178836) (approved December
                     2023, currently under implementation, moderate ESRC). Their environmental and social performance has been mixed,
                     and weak for projects under the ESF, especially for substantial risk projects. For example, under PURSCA and the
                     Emergency Locust Response Program in Djibouti (PROLUC) (P173702), while the former closed with a moderately
                     satisfactory and the latter moderately unsatisfactory, both experienced delays in implementing corrective actions and
                     lack of reporting information to assess the status of implementation of activies. The overall experience of E&S staff in
                     understanding environmental and social risk management and the application of standards was generally weak. The
                     Djibouti-Rural Community Development and Water Mobilization (PRODERMO) Project (P117355) closed December 2019
                     satisfactorily, this project was under the operational policies and not the ESF.




                    Jan 31, 2026                                                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)



                     While MAEPE-RH has recently hired E&S consultants for the PAFAD and PURSCA projects to enhance its management
                     capacity across all their current WB-financed projects, SEA/SH capacity remains weak, and overall, E&S performance
                     has been inconsistent with very weak implementation of monitoring and reporting requirements.

                     To mitigate E&S capacity risks that were present in previous projects, as this is a substantial risk for environmental,
                     social and GBV risks, the Borrower will hire a dedicated team including one environmental specialist, one social
                     specialist, and one GBV specialist within two months of Effective Date. Other E&S staff may be required depending on
                     project performance and requirements during implementation and will be decided in consultation with the client.
                     During preparation, HEIS was provided (environmental, social, and GBV specialists) to support preparation and capacity
                     building of the environmental, social and GBV team that was appointed by the Borrower for preparation. It is likely that
                     HEIS support will continue during implementation, especially in the first year of implementation.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The environmental and social risk rating is assessed as Substantial due to the planned construction and rehabilitation
                     of decentralized water infrastructure across multiple rural sites. Environmental risks primarily consist of construction-
                     related nuisances such as dust, noise, and waste generation, alongside the potential for groundwater over-extraction,



Public Disclosure
                     degradation of water quality, and cumulative effects on regional groundwater systems. The project's vulnerability to
                     climate change, particularly floods, droughts, and extreme heat, also poses a risk to infrastructure and operational
                     continuity. Furthermore, the pilot of solar-powered desalination for brackish groundwater introduces specific
                     concerns, including energy consumption, safe brine disposal, and the potential for localized soil or water
                     contamination if not managed properly. Another significant risk involves the structural integrity of surface water
                     harvesting infrastructure, such as micro-dams or retention sills; a failure, particularly during extreme rainfall, could
                     cause a sudden release of water and debris, endangering the lives, livestock, and property of downstream
                     communities. While impacts are anticipated to be site-specific, their scale may be widespread given the number of
                     planned boreholes and surface water systems. Most construction-related disturbances are expected to be short-term
                     and reversible with established mitigation measures. However, risks such as groundwater depletion, salinity intrusion
                     from desalination by-products, and biodiversity loss are more likely to be long-term and partially irreversible unless
                     proactively managed through comprehensive hydrogeological studies, the implementation of conjunctive water use
                     strategies, and robust ecological screening.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is Substantial. Activities under Component 1 (groundwater infrastructure and small-scale
                     irrigation development) could lead to a range of social risks and impacts which include: conflict and social cohesion
                     risks of both endogenous and exogenous communities due to natural resource access and which can impact
                     traditional livelihoods (nomadic herders in Djibouti and those of border communities); land acquisition affecting rural
                     communities exacerbated by complex land systems, including customary and communal land rights; physical and/or
                     economic displacement especially of vulnerable groups who rely on traditional access to land and water for their


                    Jan 31, 2026                                                                                                      Page 5 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)



                     livelihoods and cultural identity; the potential presence of Indigenous peoples in the border areas with Ethiopia;
                     exclusion of vulnerable groups including migrants from other countries (both in search of water and accessing
                     traditional customary land use systems), women, youth and persons with disabilities, and internally displaced person;
                     labor risks including informal labor (workers with no contracts especially for vulnerable laborers such as IDPs,
                     migrants), child labor and forced labor (given remote locations which may be difficult to supervise, high poverty,
                     higher rates of children out of school and widespread unemployment ), as well as exposure of local communities to
                     communicable diseases through labor exposure; SEA/SH risks due to labor influx exacerbated by limited ability to
                     regularly monitor the project due to remoteness and client capacity; weak stakeholder engagement practices
                     including exclusion or limited access or participation of vulnerable groups; weak grievance management inclusion
                     SEA/SH-GM management. Weak client monitoring and reporting is also a risk as the PIU is newly hired, despite prior
                     experience of the Ministry implementing Bank-financed projects, and since project is located in hard- to-reach remote
                     areas, with poor and unsafe road accessibility.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      The project involves complex interventions that require thorough E&S risk assessments. The environmental risks and
                      impacts associated with the project include construction-related issues such as pollution nuisances (dust, noise, and
                      vibrations) and waste generation during the construction phase. Additionally, there is potential for long-term,



Public Disclosure
                      irreversible impacts, such as improper disposal of concentrated brine effluent, groundwater resource contamination
                      during drilling, or long-term over-exploitation. Key social risks and impacts may include the potential presence of
                      Indigenous peoples and traditional communities depended on resource access for their livelihoods; physical and/or
                      economic displacement especially of vulnerable groups practicing traditional livelihoods; SEA/SH risks, labor risks
                      including informal and child labor, and security/conflict risks in borderlands. If there groups who meet the criteria for
                      Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities (IP/SSAHUTLCs) in
                      project sites, any activity which adversely impacts their habitats, livelihoods, causes physical and/or economic
                      displacement, or impacts cultural heritage will be ineligible for project financing. An ES screening will be included in
                      the ESMF to guide the preparation of site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs, inclusive of an exclusion list. To mitigate these risks
                      and impacts, an ESMF has been prepared as sites are unknown at this time, to provide standardized procedures for
                      site screening, exclusion list, impact assessment directives, and mitigation for recurrent activities like borehole drilling
                      and rehabilitation, and subsequent site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs templates. A focused ESIA will be required for the
                      desalination pilot activity due to its unique and potentially higher-risk nature, particularly concerning brine
                      management. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) was included to facilitate a swift response in
                      the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, defined as “an event that has caused, or is likely to imminently cause, a
                      major adverse economic and/or social impact associated with natural or man-made crises or disasters”. E&S
                      requirements will be included in the CERC Manual/CERC ESMF as required prior the start of CERC activities. A
                      Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be prepared for the strategies, programs, plans particularly
                      the water Master plan, and policies to be supported under component 2, in accordance with a TOR acceptable to the
                      Bank. For regional activities, IGAD will be required to ensure all workshops, studies and other technical assistance and
                      consultation activities are conducted in line with approved TORs and in line with the ESF. The Project will manage


                    Jan 31, 2026                                                                                                         Page 6 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)



                      environmental and social risks associated with the O&M schemes with contract-embedded ESHS requirements. For
                      Activities under component 2.2.4, Technical Assistance shall be prepared in a manner consistent with the ESF to
                      address potential downstream environmental and social risks and impacts of future investments, through ESF-aligned
                      TORs. As noted in their respective ESCPs, the MAEPE-RH will be required to submit ES reports quarterly and IGAD will
                      submit bi-annual ES reports which reflects the nature of their activities and risks.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      As the project development objectives focuses on benefits to communities and reslient livelihoods, the use of
                      participatory techniques and approaches and community-led activities will help mitigate risks by promoting
                      community buy-in though inclusive, meaningful, transparent and accessible consultation throughout the project
                      lifecycle. Project affected stakeholders include nomadic herders (as well as groups who meet the criteria of
                      IPs/SSAHUTLCs under ESS7 from Ethiopia) residing near proposed infrastructure sites, particularly in rural and
                      borderland areas, as well as women, elderly, youth and persons with disabilities to ensure they receive project
                      benefits. Interest parties include relevant government agencies at national and local levels, civil society organizations
                      active in the water sector and rural development, humanitarian/refugee sectors, and women's organizations. If
                      IPs/SSAHUTLCs are found in the project area, consultation requirements in line with ESS7 will be undertaken. A draft
                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including a project-level Grievance Mechanism and a GM process for SEA/SH
                      incidents will be prepared by Appraisal and disclosed, and will be updated within one month of Effective Date. The
                      GM, inclusive of a SEA/SH GM process, will be required to be operational within two months of Effective Date. IGAD
                      will also update the existing SEP in line with their activities for Djibouti and implement a GM and a GM to address
                      SEA/SH grievances.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      Project workers will include direct workers engaged by the Ministry MAEPE-RH PIU for project management,
                      oversight, and technical roles. Contracted workers will be engaged by contractors and subcontractors for civil works
                      related to borehole drilling, well construction, surface water harvesting systems, solar desalination unit installation,
                      and potentially for the construction/rehabilitation of MAEPE-RH facilities. Primary supply workers may be involved in
                      the supply of essential materials like drilling equipment, pipes, and construction materials. Community workers may
                      participate in community-based activities related to water scheme operation and maintenance and local economic
                      development initiatives. Labor risks include OHS hazards associated with civil works, child, forced, and informal labor,
                      including the use of migrant workers. The planned activities are not labor intensive and significant project induced
                      labor influx is unlikely. An LMP will be prepared to outline labor requirements to manage labor risks, including the
                      operationalization of a worker GM. IGAD will also prepare an LMP in line with their activities for Djibouti as one was
                      not previously prepared under Phase 1. In addition, for the use of solar panels, the Borrower will require bidders to
                      provide two declarations: a Forced Labor Performance Declaration (which covers past performance), and a Forced
                      Labor Declaration (which covers future commitments to prevent, monitor and report on any forced labor, cascading
                      the requirements to their own sub-contractors and suppliers). In addition, the Borrower will include enhanced
                      language on forced labor in the procurement contracts. As the PIU will be newly created, the Borrower will be
                      required to ensure sufficient capacity training for the environmental, social and GBV specialists to ensure proper
                      management of contractors, signing of the Codes of Conduct and training of same, and oversight over all types of
                      labor related risks (child/forced/informal and OHS), proper reporting. Prior to any works on existing water
                      infrastructure, the Borrower will conduct a thorough assessment to identify the presence of Asbestos-Containing


                    Jan 31, 2026                                                                                                       Page 7 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)



                      Materials (ACM), particularly in older pipe networks, by reviewing as-built drawings, conducting site inspections, and,
                      where necessary, performing material sampling and analysis; should ACM be detected, a full management plan will
                      be developed and implemented in accordance with relevant Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines and
                      Good International Industry Practice (GIIP) requirements.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant as it will consume resources and generate waste during both construction and operation phases.
                      During construction, pollution and waste from activities pose potential risks, though these are short-term, reversible,
                      and localized. These can be easily mitigated through a waste management plan, which will be required as part of the
                      site-specific ES management plan for each infrastructure. However, the pilot desalination activity (activity 1.1.5)
                      presents significant risks, such as brine effluent, which could irreversibly contaminate soil and shallow groundwater
                      during operation. Other risks include groundwater pollution during drilling, the management of construction waste,
                      and groundwater overexploitation. Site-specific mitigation plans will need to address the prevention of groundwater
                      pollution during drilling, the management of construction waste, and the safe handling, treatment, and disposal of
                      brine from the desalination pilots to prevent soil and habitat degradation. The project promotes water resource
                      efficiency through conjunctive use and demand management, while the shift to solar power for pumping enhances
                      energy efficiency and reduces reliance on diesel, thereby lowering air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions.
                      However, there is still a risk of overexploitation. The ESMF will include clear criteria for when water balances are
                      required, particularly for infrastructure components. This will be captured via the TORs for each subproject ESA
                      instrument. Findings, including potential impacts on community water access, will be disclosed to PAPs in line with
                      ESS3 para 8.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      Project activities have the potential to induce community health, safety, and security risks. Key risks include those
                      related to construction activities in or near communities, increased traffic/road risks, labor influx with limited
                      absorptive capacity due to remoteness, management of hazardous materials, and emergency situations,
                      conflict/social cohesion risks with borderland communities, and SEA/SH and exposure risks to communicable diseases
                      due to labor influx. To manage traffic and road safety risks, measures have been included in the ESMF and will be
                      included in the site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs. If the use of security personnel is envisioned, appropriate measures to
                      manage risk related to the presence of such personnel will also be included in ESMPs. Security risks were assessed in
                      ESMF with measures to address those risks to be included in the project-specific ESMPs. To address SEA/SH risks, the
                      project will prepare a SEA/SH Action Plan to be included in the ESMF, all site specific ESMPs and in the Operational
                      Manual. IGAD will include SEA/SH measures in line with an approved TOR and will be included in the Operational
                      Manual. Others risks include the potential for unsafe drinking water from new infrastructure, which could lead to
                      waterborne diseases. Another significant risk involves the structural integrity of surface water harvesting
                      infrastructure, such as micro-dams or retention sills; a failure, particularly during extreme rainfall, could cause a
                      sudden release of water and debris, endangering the lives, livestock, and property of downstream communities. The
                      project must also manage general community health and safety risks associated with construction activities.
                      Furthermore, the disposal of brine from desalination pilots presents a risk of degrading fragile rangeland ecosystems,
                      thereby threatening the pastoralist livelihoods that depend on them. To mitigate these risks, the project will ensure
                      the provision of safe drinking water by conducting rigorous quality testing for each borehole, protecting water points
                      from contamination with sanitary seals and appropriate setback distances, and training communities on safe water


                    Jan 31, 2026                                                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)



                      practices. To address infrastructure risks, all water harvesting structures will be built to sound engineering standards .
                      Site-specific studies will include hydrological studies, geotechnical investigations, and safe design plans prepared and
                      supervised by qualified engineers. Additionally, an emergency preparedness plan for downstream communities and a
                      clear operation and maintenance plan will be established. Finally, community health and safety plans will be
                      implemented to protect the public from construction hazards and to manage environmental impacts like brine
                      disposal.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                    Relevant

                      As project activities, particularly the construction of new boreholes, surface water harvesting systems, and potentially
                      the rehabilitation of existing water infrastructure, may require land acquisition leading to potential physical and/or
                      economic displacement. The project may also involve restrictions on land use or access to resources in areas around
                      new or improved water points. Potential affected assets could include land, structures, crops, and access to water
                      resources for domestic and livelihood purposes. Given that the specific locations and detailed designs of all
                      infrastructure interventions are not yet finalized, a TOR will be prepared during implementation to guide the
                      preparation of Resettlement Plans (RP) and if needed Livelihood Restoration Plans. The screening checklist in ESMF
                      will contain criteria related to physical and/or economic displacement for which the TOR will guide the preparation of
                      RPs. If IP/SSAHUTLCs are in the project area and their livelihoods and traditional lands are affected requiring physical
                      and/or economic displacement, the subproject will be excluded from the project.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources



Public Disclosure
                      This standard is relevant as the project's activities are situated in the arid and semi-arid regions of Djibouti, which are
                      defined by their fragile ecosystems. These areas, though seemingly sparse, are vital rangelands that sustain
                      pastoralist communities and harbor specially adapted flora and fauna. The most significant environmental risk stems
                      from the brine disposal associated with the desalination pilot activities. The desalination process produces a highly
                      concentrated brine containing salts, minerals, and potential chemicals from pre-treatment, which, if not managed
                      correctly, could lead to irreversible environmental damage. Key risks include the degradation of soil and vegetation
                      through improper disposal methods like leaking evaporation ponds or direct surface dumping, which could
                      permanently sterilize the soil and destroy vegetation essential for pastoral livelihoods. Furthermore, there is a risk of
                      water contamination, where the brine could seep into and pollute shallow freshwater sources or increase the salinity
                      of existing brackish aquifers, causing lasting harm to the very water resources the project aims to develop. The
                      concentrated salts and chemicals can also be toxic to desert-adapted plants and organisms, thereby disrupting the
                      local food web. The potential absence of specific national regulations for inland desalination brine management in
                      Djibouti introduces additional complexity and risk. To mitigate these concerns, a targeted ESIA will be conducted for
                      the desalination pilot, focusing heavily on brine management. The siting of the infrastructure will be carefully
                      evaluated to avoid critical or sensitive habitats, and if needed a dedicated Biodiversity Management Plan will be
                      developed for the pilot sites to establish baseline ecological conditions and enforce strict protocols for brine
                      management. Given Djibouti's extreme water scarcity and the fragility of its environment, a cautious and well-
                      planned approach is crucial to ensure the project's long-term sustainability and prevent unintended environmental
                      harm.




                    Jan 31, 2026                                                                                                        Page 9 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)



                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional              Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This is marked currently as not relevant. The applicability of this standard is pending further assessments during
                      implementation as there could be communities which meet ESS7 in border areas with Ethiopia. During
                      implementation if there are groups which meet the ESS7 criteria, this will be marked as relevant in ISRs and the client
                      will prepare the necessary measures in the ESIA/ESMP (per the ESCP). In the Djiboutian context, there are no known
                      groups who meet the criteria of IP/SSAHUTLCs in Djibouti. As there may be pastoralists and other groups who may
                      meet the criteria of IP/SSAHUTLCs from neighboring countries in the border areas, the criteria for assessment will be
                      included in the ESMF and will be applied in the screening process for the project specific ESIA/ESMPs. If ESS7
                      communities are present in implementation areas, relevant measures (an Indigenous Peoples Plan) will be included in
                      the ESIA/ESMP. All consultation requirements will be conducted in line with ESS7. However, any activity which
                      adversely impacts their habitats, livelihoods, causes physical and/or economic displacement, or impacts cultural
                      heritage will be ineligible for project financing.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                      Relevant

                      The planned physical activities include deep borehole drilling, well construction, surface water harvesting
                      infrastructure (sand dams, cisterns, a new dam), and the construction/rehabilitation of buildings (regional center,
                      central base). These activities involve excavation, earth movement, and potential changes to the physical
                      environment, which require Chance Finds Procedures to be included in the ESMF. The Chance Finds Procedures in
                      addition to an assessment of tangible and intangible cultural heritage, will be included in the site specific



Public Disclosure
                      ESIAs/ESMPs, with project-affected communities consulted to inform the assessment and management of such
                      impacts. If IPs/SSAHUTLCs are in the project area, consultation requirements will be in line with ESS7 and ESS8.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not relevant as the project does not include the use of financial intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            No
                       The Borrower's Framework will not be used as this project is not a moderate or low risk project.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       Not applicable.




                    Jan 31, 2026                                                                                                   Page 10 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     By Appraisal (for MAEPE-RH):
                     -       Submit an advance draft ESMF for review but not to be disclosed (it will include assessments for IP/SSAHUTLCs
                     and security/conflict risks, cultural heritage assessment/Chance Finds, biodiversity impacts), inclusive of an exclusion
                     list
                     -       A draft SEP (to include appropriate consultation measures for IPs if required and traditional communities reliant
                     on natural resource use/access).
                     -       ESCP
                     -       SEA/SH Action to be included in the ESMF
                     -    ESCP

                     By Appraisal (for IGAD)
                     - ESCP

                     During implementation for (MAEPE-RH):
                     -        Finalize the ESMF
                     -        TOR for SESA for Water Master Plan
                     -        SESA for the water master plan and other policies/regulations
                     -        Site specific ESIAs/ESMPs. A social assessment will be include determine applicability of ESS7 if such



Public Disclosure
                     communities are present in border areas. If IP/SSAHUTLCs are in the project area, appropriate measures will be
                     included in the ESIA/ESMP as an Indigenous Peoples Plan (activities which engender adverse impacts to their habits,
                     livelihoods, cultural heritage, or induce physical and/or economic displacement will be excluded from the project).
                     -        TOR for a Resettlement Plan if the ESIAs/ESMPs determine there will be physical and/or economic
                     displacement
                     -        SEA/SH Action Plan (to be included in ESMF and ESIAs/ESMPs)
                     -        Resettlement Plan if the site-specific ESIAs determine ESS5 impacts
                     -        LMP

                     For IGAD (during implementation):
                     -      SEP (using updated template)
                     -      LMP
                     -      SEA/SH Action Plan (in LMP and Operational Manual)
                     -      Updated SESA
                     -      TOR for SESAs




                     III. CONTACT POINT


                    Jan 31, 2026                                                                                                   Page 11 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Djibouti Groundwater For Resilience And Water Supply Project (P511492)



                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Chris Fischer                        Title:          Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  cfischer1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Safaa Bahije                         Job Title:      Water Resources Specialist

                      Email:                  sbahije@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                             Chris Fischer, Safaa Bahije




Public Disclosure
                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                    Fadoumo Ali Malow

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                           Gina Cosentino




                    Jan 31, 2026                                                                                                Page 12 of 12
