Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   IDA-IFC Agribusiness Program Phase 1(P511417)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Jan-2026 | Report No: PIDDC01507




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     IDA-IFC Agribusiness Program Phase 1(P511417)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
Yemen, Republic of             P511417                       IDA-IFC Agribusiness Program Phase 1
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
MID EAST,NORTH                 13-Jul-2026                   30-Oct-2026                    Agriculture and Food
AFRICA,AFG,PAK
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
Investment Project             To be determined              To be determined
Financing (IPF)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Increase in volume of milk sold through organized sector and net price realization at producer level, while fostering
private sector participation in agri-business in the project areas.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    To be decided
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                           100.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                100.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                  100.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  100.00
      IDA Grant                                                                                                 100.00



                                                                                                                        Page 1



                                                                                                             Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         IDA-IFC Agribusiness Program Phase 1(P511417)




  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                        Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                         The review did authorize the preparation to continue



 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.      Yemen remains affected by fragility and conflict, climate shocks, with significant food and nutrition insecurity
and constrained private sector activity. The country’s economic and social indicators have deteriorated sharply. Between
2015 and 2024, real GDP shrank by 43 and nominal GDP per capita fell by 70 percent, to US$433 in 2024, signifying a
dramatic impact on living standards1. Economic prospects for 2025 are clouded, as real GDP is projected to contract by
1.5 percent, and nominal GDP per capita is expected to fall by another 14.2 percent2. Poverty is widespread, with
approximately 75 percent of Yemenis now living in poverty and basic services largely collapsed. Food insecurity is severe,
with inadequate food consumption reported by 64 percent of households in IRG-controlled areas and 62 percent in
Houthi-controlled areas in August 2025. Malnutrition rates are among the highest globally especially for women and
children, with 17 percent of children wasted, 49 percent stunted and 41 percent underweight. In September 2025, the IPC
warned of worsening food security, raising the risk of catastrophic hunger by the end of 2025. Across Yemen, living
conditions are dire, with only about 55 percent of the health facilities functioning, and less than 62 percent of the
population having access to at least basic drinking water services3. The disrepair of critical infrastructure across all sectors
has limited Yemen’s ability to emerge from these challenges.

2.       The conflict in Yemen escalated in 2015, triggering one of the world’s worst humanitarian crises. About 4.58
million people are internally displaced, most living in precarious conditions without reliable access to food, water, or
health services. Yemen experiences some of the world’s highest levels of gender inequality, consistently ranking at the
bottom of the Global Gender Gap Index, with female labor force participation at just 5-6 percent4. Similarly, the country
finds itself toward the bottom of the 2025 Human Development Index at 184 out of 193 countries.5 The war has devastated
infrastructure: roads, bridges, schools, hospitals, and water and sanitation systems have been destroyed or severely
damaged, leading to the near-total collapse of public service delivery. Governance remains deeply divided. Two rival
authorities control Yemen: (i) the Houthi movement (Ansar Allah) based in Sanaa and (ii) the internationally recognized
government (IRG) in Aden, which oversees most oil and gas resources. Each maintains separate institutions, including dual
central banks and currencies, creating widening disparities in economic conditions and service delivery6.



1 World Bank. (2025). Yemen Systematic Country Diagnostic 2025
2 World Bank. (2025). Yemen Economic Monitor: Navigating Increased Hardship and Growing Economic Fragmentation
3 World Bank. (2025). Yemen Systematic Country Diagnostic 2025
4 World Bank. (2025). Yemen Systematic Country Diagnostic 2025
5 UNDP. (2025). Human Development Report 2025: A Matter of Choice: People and Possibilities in the Age of AI
6 World Bank. (2025). Yemen Economic Monitor: Navigating Increased Hardship and Growing Economic Fragmentation




                                                                                                                                           Page 2



                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         IDA-IFC Agribusiness Program Phase 1(P511417)


3.      Yemen’s recovery requires a strategic shift from short-term humanitarian aid to a comprehensive development
agenda that strengthens nutrition security, climate resilience, and institutional capacity. The 2024 Country Climate and
Development Report (CCDR) and other frameworks highlight the need to scale up development interventions alongside
emergency assistance, leveraging pockets of stability and capacity within the broader context of fragility, conflict, and
violence (FCV). This transition is essential to break the cycle of aid dependence and lay the foundation for more sustainable
progress.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context

4.       Agriculture is a key pillar of Yemen’s economy, adding an estimated 16 percent to GDP in 20247, while
employing about 29 percent of the workforce in 20238. It supports food security, rural livelihoods, and non-oil exports.
The sector faces severe water scarcity and relies heavily on rainfed farming, which dominates roughly 50 percent of
cultivated land, with annual rainfall ranging from 50–250 mm in eastern and coastal areas to 1,200 mm in the southern
highlands. Most employment occurs in low-productivity rural segments and the sector’s job creation potential is
undermined by limited private engagement due to land and water insecurity, fragmented value chains, and poor
infrastructure, as well as broader security risks and institutional fragility. Yet, examples like the NANA dairy factory in
Aden, generating 200–300 full time jobs in the processing factory and women’s employment in village milk centers, show
agribusiness’s potential for transforming the entire sector by boosting farm productivity and linking on-farm and off-farm
agribusiness.

5.       Yemen’s agrifood sector offers opportunities for transformation through targeted investments in several high-
potential value chains that combine strong domestic demand, export potential, and inclusive employment generation.
Targeted interventions, such as expanding access to finance and risk-sharing instruments, strengthening producer
institutions and aggregation models, investing in supply chain infrastructure, fostering private-public partnerships,
implementing evidence-based gender responsive interventions, and improving policy and regulatory frameworks, can
unlock private investment, accelerate inclusive agribusiness development, and create sustainable jobs, especially for
women and youth. Transforming these high potential value chains will build long-term resilience against economic and
climate shocks, contributing towards Yemen’s recovery.

6.      Addressing climate change risks is critical to unlocking resilient and sustainable growth and resilience in key
value chains. Primary agricultural production and the wider agrifood system represents about 31 and 62 percent of total
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in Yemen. Dairy animals alone contributed around 29 percent to total GHG emissions in
Yemen, including 37 percent of total methane emissions. At the same time, climate change is projected to lead to rising
temperatures, increasing precipitation, and higher variability and intensity of weather events, leading to longer and hotter
dry periods, intensifying droughts, and more erratic rainfall. Yemen’s livestock sector is particularly vulnerable to
increasing thermal stress, posing a serious threat to animal health, reproduction, and productivity, especially in dairy
systems. Flooding and strong winds further disrupt water availability, feed quality, and veterinary service delivery. These
impacts contribute to reduced milk yields, increased disease risk (e.g., sub -clinical mastitis), and distress sales,
disproportionately affecting smallholders and women. Climate hazards also threaten cold chain infrastructure and
processing investments. While these shifts pose severe risks for the agricultural sector in the absence of appropriate
investments, they can also present potential opportunities if addressed appropriately9.



7 FAOSTAT. (2024). Value Added (Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing)
8 FAOSTAT. (2023). Share of employment in agriculture in total employment
9 World Bank 2024: Yemen Country and Climate Development Report




                                                                                                                         Page 3



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          IDA-IFC Agribusiness Program Phase 1(P511417)


7.       Women play a vital yet undervalued role in agribusiness, facing persistent gender disparities that limit their
economic potential and sector-wide impact. Agriculture sustains two-thirds of Yemenis, with over 75 percent in rural
areas where women comprise 95 percent of the labor force and 88 percent nationally.10 Despite this, their roles are largely
informal, underpaid, and concentrated in low-value segments. Only 13 percent of women hold land rights, and fewer than
0.2 percent of female-headed households have irrigation access, contributing to a productivity gap of over 40 percent
compared to men.11 Women are central to climate adaptation—managing kitchen gardens, dairy, and natural resources—
yet face barriers to finance, technology, and decision-making (International Finance Corporation & World Bank, 2023).12
Structural constraints, including restrictive gender norms, GBV/harassment, mobility limitations, and unpaid care work,
further hinder participation. FAO’s Status of Women in Agrifood Systems (2023) stresses that empowering women boosts
productivity, resilience, and food security.13 Gender-sensitive interventions—such as inclusive value chains, tailored
finance, and capacity-building—show promise, while programs like FSRRP and IDA initiatives demonstrate impact through
irrigation and training (World Bank Group, 2024). Closing these gaps requires systemic change, private sector engagement,
and strategies that amplify women’s voices. Investing in women’s leadership and agency including access to land, finance,
and climate-smart technologies is essential for Yemen’s agricultural transformation and inclusive growth.

8.      To realize the development opportunities of the high-potential value chains, the proposed Multiphase
Programmatic Approach (MPA) will target identified value chains in distinct phases, with phase 1 focusing on the dairy
sector. This sector is characterized by a smallholder production system with small herd sizes of approximately 2-3 animals
per farmer and low productivity (about 200 – 400 liters per animal per lactation). Yet, it is one of the largest agricultural
commodities, contributing significantly to national economy and providing additional income to the farmers. Livestock is
the main source of livelihood for small and marginal farmers. Furthermore, cattle are an essential asset for many rural
households, providing draught power, manure for agricultural production, and insurance against extreme weather. The
dairy sector is also an important source of nutrition, accounting for a significant proportion of per capita protein
consumption. While demand for dairy products is growing, low productivity and fragmented markets mean that current
production levels only satisfy about one-third of domestic demand, leading to a heavy dependence on imports and high
prices for dairy products. Targeted investments can strengthen household food security and resilience to shocks, while
also creating job opportunities and increasing income security.

9.        A critical challenge facing Yemen’s dairy sector is addressing the structural constraints in the dairy sector, which
is characterized by low productivity, fragmented market access, and limited private sector engagement. To unlock the
sector’s potential, there is a need for a sequenced approach: (i) restoring critical production capacity and service delivery
at farm and micro small and medium enterprise (MSME) levels; (ii) improving quality, food safety, and collection logistics;
and (iii) enabling private investment and job creation. The Project strategy actively engages private sector actors—such
as HSA and NANA Foods—to expand milk collection, processing, and distribution infrastructure, shifting reliance from
imported skim milk powder to locally sourced fresh milk. Complementary investments in cold chain systems, veterinary
services, and farmer training are envisioned to catalyze inclusive growth. Recognizing the private sector as a resilience
pillar amid Yemen’s FCV context, the Project design leverages IDA–IFC collaboration to crowd in private capital, foster
innovation, and create sustainable employment opportunities across the agribusiness value chain.

 Relationship to CPF

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

10 World Bank. (2023). Climate adaptation and agriculture in Yemen.
11 World Bank Group. (2024). Yemen agriculture sector review: Gender dimensions and climate resilience.
12 Christiaensen, L. & Demery, L. (2023). Agriculture in Africa: Telling Myths from Facts
13 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2023). The status of women in agrifood systems: FAO flagship report.




                                                                                                                                            Page 4



                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       IDA-IFC Agribusiness Program Phase 1(P511417)


 Increase in volume of milk sold through organized sector and net price realization at producer level, while fostering
 private sector participation in agri-business in the program areas.

  Key Results (From PCN)

     a) Increase in the share of milk sold to the organized sector.
     b) Farmers adopting climate resilient practices (disaggregated by gender).
     c) Volume of credit accessed from FIs by producer, milk producer institutions and MSMEs supported by the project
        (gender disaggregated).
     d) Full time equivalent (FTE) jobs generated in beneficiary firms (disaggregated by gender).

 D. Concept Description

10.      The project design adopts a farmer-centric approach tailored to the Yemeni context, with a focus on improving
service delivery and inclusive market development. It aims to enhance the quality of inputs and services provided to
farmers through the adoption of standardized protocols and ensuring timely and effective technical support at the farm
level. To strengthen market access, the project promotes village-level institutional mechanisms that operate transparently
and equitably, while actively engaging private sector agribusiness, including IFC-supported agribusiness enterprises—in
the development of aggregation, processing, and distribution systems.

11.     The Project will adopt a light-touch community level institutional model to strengthen milk aggregation and
quality assurance in Yemen’s dairy value chain. At the village level, informal Milk Producer Institutions (MPIs) comprising
10–20 farmers or milk pourers will be supported to perform basic functions such as milk bulking and quality testing.
Payments to farmers will remain individualized to maintain transparency and trust, while a simple capacity-building
module will be introduced to improve hygiene, record-keeping, and quality standards without requiring formalization into
cooperatives. This approach minimizes transaction costs and governance complexity, making it suitable for fragile
contexts.

12.     Beyond village-level aggregation, the Project will promote private-sector participation by engaging individual
entrepreneurs to manage Bulk Milk Cooler (BMC) networks and also explore the options for working with higher-order
producer organizations. Given the operating environment in Yemen, the proposed Project will undertake necessary due
diligence and risks assessment prior to engaging with existing cooperatives. Milk supply from BMCs to processors could
be bundled through these entrepreneurs and/or higher order producer institutions or collected directly by processors
along predefined milk routes. This model aims to improve milk quality, reduce spoilage, and create opportunities for
smallholders, women, and youth, while fostering private investment in milk collection and processing. Over time, the
approach can be scaled and adapted based on lessons learned, with potential for gradual formalization in later phases.

13.      Given the long-term nature of agriculture value chain improvement and the fragmented structure of Yemen’s
agriculture sector, public investment is essential to catalyze technology transfer and productivity gains. While private
sector interest in upstream investments remains limited, IFC has initiated strategic partnerships with local dairy processors
such as the Hayel Saeed Anam (HSA) Group to expand processing capacity and shift sourcing from imported skim milk
powder to locally sourced fresh milk. By aligning IDA’s public investments with IFC’s private sector engagement, the
initiative seeks to unlock inclusive growth and job creation in Yemen’s dairy sector. These efforts are expected to generate
significant employment opportunities across the value chain—from farm-level production to processing and logistics—
particularly for youth and women.



                                                                                                                         Page 5



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       IDA-IFC Agribusiness Program Phase 1(P511417)



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                   Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                         TBD
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                   TBD



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


14.      The Environmental and social risks include dust, noise, and construction waste which may arise from both
construction and rehabilitation activities. Operation of new or upgraded facilities may increase energy and water
consumption, and improper management of animal waste, chemicals (e.g., disinfectants, veterinary pharmaceuticals), and
packaging materials may lead to localized soil and water pollution. The expansion of feed and fodder processing facilities
may result in increased use of agricultural inputs and runoff to nearby water bodies. The project may generate non-
hazardous and hazardous waste, including animal waste, expired pharmaceuticals, packaging, and organic residues from
feed processing. Inadequate waste management could pose risks to soil and water quality, particularly in areas with
limited municipal services. In terms of community health and safety, the intensification of livestock production and
expansion of veterinary services may increase the risk of zoonotic disease transmission if biosecurity measures are not
adequately implemented. Key social risks under all three components cluster around (i) equitable inclusion of communities
in agricultural support and market access—especially among vulnerable groups such as women, youth, and smallholders;
(ii) safe and equitable rollout of artificial insemination breeding services; (iii) One Health and zoonotic disease
management as livestock services expand; (iv) barriers to accessing finance that can exclude vulnerable groups, especially
women farmers; (v) risks such as elite capture, market exclusion, and (vi) economic and/or physical displacement.

15.     There are risks to communities, women, and vulnerable groups, especially resulting from entrenched gender
norms that limit women’s mobility, participation, leadership, control over assets/income, and safe access to markets and
services, women’s concentration in informal, low-value chain segments with low/unstable earnings, and rural remoteness
and weak producer institutions can leave poorer and more remote smallholders (including women-headed households
and youth) excluded from benefits. SEA/SH risks due to labor influx during construction and in financial service delivery
are possible (due to power asymmetries between beneficiaries and agents/loan officers, and interactions at payment or
loan disbursement sites, can create risks of harassment, exploitation, or quid pro quo). Gender focused programming can
also provoke backlash in conservative contexts without careful engagement. There are also risks to data privacy as mobile-
based communication and digitized onboarding/credit reporting raise risks of data misuse, especially sensitive data on
women and vulnerable groups. In addition, there are risks to labor and working conditions in financed MSMEs as sub-
borrower activities can involve poor labor practices (wage violations, discrimination, OHS lapses) requiring proportionate
E&S screening and supervision by participating financial institutions (FIs).


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT




                                                                                                                      Page 6



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     IDA-IFC Agribusiness Program Phase 1(P511417)


World Bank
 Manivannan Pathy
 Senior Agribusiness Specialist

 Faiza Hesham Hael Ahmed
 Senior Agriculture Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 To be determined

Implementing Agencies
 To be determined

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Manivannan Pathy, Faiza Hesham Hael Ahmed

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Rabih H. Karaky                    10-Dec-2025

Country Director:                      Dina N. Abu-Ghaida                 22-Jan-2026




                                                                                                Page 7



                                                                                        Official Use Only
