Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 10/11/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04519




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 13, 2025                                                                             Page 1 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P511300                   Program-for-Results Financing (PforR)   UCMID                      2026

                     Operation Name            Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Uganda                    Uganda                                  EASTERN AND                Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                       SOUTHERN AFRICA            Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance,      Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban    03-Nov-2025                04-Dec-2025
                     Planning and              Development
                     Economic
                     Development




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     28-Oct-2025               540,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The PDO is to enhance the institutional performance of selected urban local governments and ministries for urban
                     planning and management and improve access to climate smart infrastructure, services and jobs for urban residents and
                     displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) Program aims to enhance the institutional
                     performance of urban local governments and relevant ministries for urban planning and management. It seeks to
                     increase access to climate-smart infrastructure, services, and local economic opportunities, benefiting both urban
                     residents and displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas. The program will address challenges such as rapid

                    Oct 13, 2025                                                                                                   Page 2 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                     urbanization, inadequate transport infrastructure, lack of integrated urban planning, limited technical and financial
                     resources, climate change impacts, and issues in refugee host districts. It aligns with Uganda’s 2025–2035 Country
                     Partnership Framework, building on lessons from the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development
                     (USMID) to strengthen urban service delivery. UCMID is a follow-on operation to the USMID and USMID-AF programs
                     aiming to build on the progress and successes under both initiatives. UCMID is urban and nationwide and will be
                     implemented in two Ministries Departments and Agencies (Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development –
                     Coordinating Ministry and Ministry of Local Government), 10 secondary cities (Jinja, Mbarara, Gulu, Arua, Masaka,
                     Hoima, Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Fort Portal), 11 municipalities (Kabale, Moroto, Tororo, Kitgum, Kasese, Kamuli, Mubende,
                     Busia, Ntungamo, Apac, Lugazi, Entebbe) supported under the previous USMID Program, 15 new municipalities
                     (Masindi, Rukungiri, Bushenyi-Ishaka, Mityana, Kumi, Nebbi, Koboko, Kisoro, Kapchorwa, Ibanda, Iganga, Njeru, Bugiri,
                     Sheema, Kotido), and 11 districts hosting refugees (Arua , Isingiro, Kamwenge, Kiryandongo, Lamwo, Maddi-Okollo,
                     Moyo, Obongi, Terego, Yumbe). The program has two main components: Component 1 (PforR) focuses on urban
                     development performance and investments, financing resilient infrastructure and services, and promoting peaceful
                     coexistence in refugee-hosting areas. This component seeks to achieve results in three Result Areas (RAs): (i) RA1:
                     Enhanced local and national level government institutional capacity and performance for sustainable urban
                     management, (ii) RA2: Increased access to climate smart urban infrastructure, services and local economic
                     development, and (iii) RA3: Integrated climate smart infrastructure, services and local economic development for the
                     host communities and refugees. The IPF component is designed to directly support the achievement of the Program
                     Development Objectives and Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) by financing upstream activities that enable
                     effective implementation and results delivery under the PforR. It will focus on strengthening national systems for urban
                     development, program coordination, and technical capacity at both central and local government levels. Specifically, the




Public Disclosure
                     IPF will finance: (i) overall program management specified in the Program Operations Manual (POM), including
                     operational coordination, monitoring and evaluation, ESHS risk management, enforcement and supervision, and the
                     engagement of an Independent Verification Agent (IVA) to conduct the Annual Performance Assessments (APA) and
                     verify results against the DLI matrix; (ii) the development and rollout of key policy, regulatory, and planning tools, such
                     as the urban data platforms, GIS-based systems and digital innovations, and national frameworks for climate-smart and
                     inclusive urban infrastructure; and (iii) technical assistance and targeted capacity building for national and local
                     institutions in areas such as fiduciary systems, land use management, occupational health and safety (OSH), community
                     health and safety, labor and working conditions and climate-resilient planning. The IPF will also support the
                     conceptualization and piloting of a corridor-based approach to urban investment planning. This includes the
                     development of national corridor design guidelines and investment packaging tools that will help structure integrated
                     infrastructure projects—linking roads, drainage, markets, and utility networks—along strategic urban corridors. The IPF
                     component will dedicate US20 million to support ESHS systems improvements and capacity strengthening of key MDAs
                     (MLHUD, MGLSD, NEMA), implementing entities, and Contractors. Activities will include (I) Professionalization and
                     accreditation of OHS professionals through the Learning Centre on E&S Standards at Makerere University, (II) upgrading
                     and integration of OHS and Labor Management Information Systems to enhance incident management, reporting and
                     compensation, (III) development of socio-economic assessments, (IV) development of land acquisition protocols and/or
                     resettlement plans— including livelihood restoration; and (V) finance land acquisition and resettlement expenditures;
                     (VI) develop a communication and stakeholder engagement strategy for the Program; and (VII) strengthening grievance
                     management systems including worker GRMs. UCMID will also benefit from an Enhanced Implementation Support and
                     Monitoring (EISM) firm hired directly by the World Bank to support the Project Implementation Support Team (PIST)
                     and the World Bank following the enactment of the Anti-Homosexuality Act 2023 in Uganda. The firm will work with
                     NGO/CSOs and country-based development partners since knowledge of the country context and culture are key


                    Oct 13, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                     considerations to be taken onto account. The EISM will: (i) establish an effective and confidential mechanism to receive,
                     manage, refer, and monitor grievances related to discrimination of Sexual and Gender Minorities (SGM). (ii) support
                     outreach and sensitization to Program beneficiaries and communities. (iii) provide capacity strengthening and technical
                     support to the PIST and (iv) regularly monitor and evaluate the implementation of measures to mitigate the risk of
                     discrimination in all WB’s financed operations in Uganda including UCMID.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The IPF component of the proposed UCMID Program is designed to directly support the achievement of the Program
                     Development Objectives and Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) by financing upstream activities, with a particular
                     focus on ESHS improvements, that enable effective implementation and results delivery under the PforR, in line with
                     PforR policy. The Program is a follow-on operation to the USMID and USMID-AF programs aiming to build on the
                     progress and successes under both initiatives. UCMID is urban and nationwide and will be implemented in 3 Ministries
                     Departments and Agencies (Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Lands, Housing and
                     Urban Development, Ministry of Local Government), 10 secondary cities (Jinja, Mbarara, Gulu, Arua, Masaka, Hoima,
                     Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Fort Portal), 11 municipalities (Kabale, Moroto, Tororo, Kitgum, Kasese, Kamuli, Mubende, Busia,
                     Ntungamo, Apac, Lugazi, Entebbe) supported under the previous USMID Program, 14 new municipalities (Masindi,
                     Rukungiri, Bushenyi-Ishaka, Mityana, Kumi, Nebbi, Koboko, Kisoro, Kapchorwa, Ibanda, Njeru, Bugiri, Sheema, Kotido),
                     and 11 districts hosting refugees (Arua , Isingiro, Kamwenge, Kiryandongo, Lamwo, Maddi-Okollo, Moyo, Obongi,
                     Terego, Yumbe).




Public Disclosure
                     According to the National Census of population, the total population of Uganda was 45,935,046 in 2024, with an annual
                     rate of population growth of 2.9%. Refugee influx in Uganda accelerated over the period 2014 – 2024, during which the
                     refugee population increased from 400,000 in 2014 to 1.55 million by mid-2023. According to UNHCR, the refugee influx
                     is likely to continue to increase in coming years. Between 2014 and 2024, Uganda experienced rapid urbanization, with
                     an annual urban growth rate of approximately 4.5%. This growth was marked by the declaration of 15 new cities—10 of
                     which were gazetted in 2020—signaling a strategic shift toward strengthening secondary cities as engines of local
                     economic development. However, urban expansion often outpaced infrastructure and service delivery. Secondary cities
                     continued to face challenges, with most employment remaining informal and youth disproportionately affected. The
                     urban transition in Uganda remains constrained by limited industrialization, weak enforcement of planning regulations,
                     and socio-economic inequalities.

                     The UCMID cities and municipalities are experiencing rapid urbanization driven by population increases, rural-urban
                     migration, and administrative upgrades, which often occur at the expense of the environment. These LGs have, in
                     recent years, expanded their boundaries, which has resulted in greater volumes of waste to handle due to growing
                     populations and businesses such as markets, taxi parks, and bus parks. They have limited infrastructure for waste
                     collection and temporary storage, often inadequate land for waste disposal sites, and insufficient capacity for waste
                     treatment. They are also increasingly facing floods of greater frequency and magnitude, which are affecting other
                     infrastructure, including settlements, markets, and transport facilities such as bus and taxi parks. The refugee hosting
                     districts are mainly rural facing challenges related to deforestation, land degradation and water resource stress from the
                     increased demand for these resources.




                    Oct 13, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                     The Program will cover some municipalities within refugee hosting-districts, refugee transit districts/urban centers and
                     selected secondary cities. These areas experience high levels of poverty, unemployment, and deficits in social service
                     delivery, and a degraded natural resource base. Due to impact of refugee inflows, trees in some areas are cut down for
                     firewood, charcoal, timber, and the expansion of settlements and agricultural land. There are agroforestry initiatives
                     and CDD woodlots established in some of the refugee-hosting districts which are meant to counter the impact on
                     refugee settlements in these areas.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The IPF component will be implemented by MoLHUD, which will also be responsible for overall implementation of the
                     Program and provide oversight of all Program activities. A Program Support Team (PST) will be established to support
                     MoLHUD in (i) Program Coordination, (ii) Procurement, (iii) Financial Management, (iii) Engineering, (iv) Physical
                     Planning, (iv) Environmental, Social and Health and Safety Risk Management and (v) Communication for the program
                     implementation.

                     The MoLHUD has prior experience implementing World Bank-financed projects and programs, including the Uganda
                     Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID), Competitiveness Enterprise Development Project (CEDP),
                     and Albertine Region Sustainability Development Project (ARSDP). USMID was a Program-for-Results (PforR) initiative,
                     where the World Bank ESF did not apply, while CEDP and ARSDP were implemented under the old Bank safeguards
                     policies (Operational Policies). The USMID Program recorded multiple fatalities and serious incidents;, causes included
                     inadequate risk assessments, poor supervision, insufficient training, weak traffic management, and lack of community
                     awareness. These incidents highlighted systemic shortcomings in contractor




Public Disclosure
                     compliance, insufficient staffing for ESHS supervision, and limited enforcement capacity among supervising consultants
                     and key oversight institutions such as MoGLSD and NEMA. Other challenges faced included delays in obtaining statutory
                     environmental assessment approvals, and delays in decommissioning and restoration of auxiliary sites. Under the
                     USMID Program, two Grievance Redress Service (GRS) cases were registered involving damage to a hotel and loss of
                     income, and the second, raised on behalf of multiple project-affected persons (PAPs), concerned property destruction
                     and lack of compensation. A Post-Closure Action Plan (PCAP) was developed to address unresolved issues at the time of
                     closure of the Program in June 2024, including outstanding grievances and incomplete infrastructure works. The PCAP
                     required continued monitoring of actions such as compensation for PAPs and repairs to damaged property. Given past
                     track record on ESHS risk management under those prior operations and the lack of experience with the World Bank’s
                     ESF, it is therefore necessary to significantly strengthen the capacity within MoLHUD regarding the World Bank’s ESF to
                     ensure effective and efficient management of environmental and social risks and impacts. To support project
                     implementation at MoLHUD, there is a need for environment, health and safety, and social technical support through
                     the recruitment of one Environment Specialist, one Health and Safety Specialist , and one Social Development Specialist
                     (with a background on land acquisition planning and implementation) on the PST.

                     The E&S capacity at the participating cities, municipal councils, and refugee-hosting districts was assessed during the IPF
                     and Program preparation, including under the draft Environmental and Social Systems Assessment for the PforR
                     component, and capacity enhancement measures proposed. The capacity building under the IPF component will also
                     aim at strengthening systems and capacities for ESHS risk assessment and management of the at the of key MDAs
                     (MoLHUD, Ministry of Gender Labor and Social Development, National Environment Management Authority),
                     implementing entities, Contractors and sub-contractors, as well as supervising entities.



                    Oct 13, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Moderate
                     The IPF Component will mainly support technical assistance (development of policy and planning tools, national
                     frameworks, and capacity building (with a particular focus on ESHS systems and capacity strengthening, etc.) with
                     minimal or no direct physical works. It will also not support preparation of feasibility studies and designs of
                     investments financed by the PforR. It will also support the conceptualization and piloting of a corridor-based
                     approach to urban investment planning, including the development of national corridor design guidelines and
                     investment packaging tools that will help structure integrated infrastructure projects—linking roads, drainage,
                     markets, and utility networks—along strategic urban corridors; however, there will be no construction under this
                     component. Environmental risks are therefore benign and largely associated with the procurement and use of IT
                     equipment (e.g., generation of e-waste), energy consumption, OHS risks (e.g. related to travel, workshops, fieldwork).
                     In addition, there are risks (if not done well), but also significant opportunities to, under this IPF, further improve the
                     capacities and systems on environmental, heath and safety management of the implementing entities of the PforR.
                     With these, the environmental risk rating for the IPF component is assessed as Moderate.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Social Risk Rating is substantial. Although activities supported under the IPF component, if planned and
                     implemented well, are expected to generate benefits as result of capacity building and improved policies/systems and


Public Disclosure
                     enhanced environmentally and socially sustainable and inclusive urban management, there could be risks relating to
                     stakeholder engagement, social inclusion (e.g., exclusion of vulnerable groups in policy development) and inadequate
                     enhancement under this IPF of ESHS capacities and systems of the entities to implement the Program in line with
                     PforR policy. Risks of discrimination and exclusion may be exacerbated in the context of the Anti-Homosexuality Act,
                     2023 and require enhanced implementation support and monitoring. Furthermore, and importantly, new policies,
                     plans, and systems that are being supported under this IPF component will inform future investments and, if not done
                     properly by incorporating fully relevant ESS requirements in such technical assistance (in terms of reference and the
                     technical assistance provided), it may lead to indirect and downstream social impacts and risks associated with
                     investments under the PforR (IPF component is not implementing any works on urban development). Despite the
                     MoLHUD’s previous experience with World Bank-financed projects and programs, significant challenges have
                     persisted particularly regarding capacity to implement land acquisition and resettlement (with reliance on land
                     donations as the preferred approach for land acquisition - not aligned with World Bank requirements, including ESS5)
                     and the IPF will provide support in this regard. The presence of refugee populations in several targeted municipalities
                     introduces further vulnerability, heightening the risk of exclusion from project benefits. Robust grievance mechanisms
                     (GMs) are essential for resolving stakeholder or worker grievances promptly and effectively and facilitating
                     meaningful engagement with communities and other relevant stakeholders. The GMs to be implemented must be
                     well suited to address issues relating to SEA/SH both within the context of institutions and entities involved as well as
                     in communities where the project will interface. Issues relating to recruitment, terms and conditions of employment,
                     working conditions and OHS may arise, and therefore implementation of a worker GM will be essential.




                    Oct 13, 2025                                                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The risks will be mitigated by ensuring that terms of reference for all the TA activities integrate relevant World Bank
                      ESS requirements and that ESHS staffing and capacity building are implemented and supported at the national and
                      local levels, in line with the ESSs. An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) has been developed.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      The requirements of ESS10 will be embedded in the development of the technical assistance and this Project will also
                      provide technical assistance to the Ministry of Lands in the development and implementation of a communications
                      and stakeholder engagement strategy for the PforR component, and the establishment of dedicated grievance
                      management systems for the Program. taking into account the outcome of such consultations. The SEP will address
                      risks identified by stakeholders, ensuring the inclusion and non-discrimination of vulnerable groups. The goal of
                      stakeholder engagement is to incorporate their perspectives through meaningful consultations, thereby improving
                      the project's environmental and social sustainability, enhancing its acceptance, and contributing to its successful
                      design and implementation. To ensure effective grievance mechanisms (GMs) in participating municipalities and
                      cities, efforts will be made to establish and strengthen these systems. This will include comprehensive training for
                      district officials, equipping them with the necessary tools and knowledge to support the GM’s implementation and
                      functionality.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The proposed activities will require a small number of Direct workers (employed by the Project Implementation Unit
                      and MoLHUD), Contracted Workers (mainly in the form of technical consultants, for some of the TA activities e.g.
                      development of policy and planning tools, design guidelines, and investment packaging tools, engagement of the IVA,
                      capacity building support) and Government Civil Servants (involved in project oversight and implementation support).
                      Government staff will be governed by Public Service Code of Conduct, Uganda Labor Law, and relevant aspects of
                      ESS2. The contracts for the Direct and Contracted Workers will incorporate relevant requirements of ESS2 and labor
                      laws of Uganda, as well as codes of conduct. A dedicated grievance mechanism for Project workers will be established
                      in line with ESS2 and detailed further in the Project Operations Manual.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                               Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant for the IPF component but TORs for studies and development of the tools and design
                      guidelines will integrate requirements under ESS3, as needed.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      Direct risks to community health and safety from the TA activities are considered low. Related TORs will be required
                      to be consistent with ESS4.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant


                    Oct 13, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                      The activities envisaged under the IPF component comprise technical assistance, capacity building, and policy
                      development support, and shall not involve land acquisition or cause involuntary resettlement. However, it is
                      anticipated that the IPF will support Technical Assistance including capacity strengthening and training on land
                      acquisition and resettlement. The ToR for such Technical Assistance will incorporate relevant requirements of ESS5
                      and, hence, this ESS is relevant for the IPF. Further, this Project will provide funding to cover part of the land
                      acquisition and resettlement costs associated with the mandatory in cash or in kind compensation to address impacts
                      caused by the PforR investments.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                 Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      Not relevant for the IPF component. However, ESHS systems strengthening and capacity building will include
                      requirements under ESS6.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional            Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      Not relevant for the IPF component.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                      Not Currently Relevant

                      Not relevant for the IPF component.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                               Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not relevant as the project financing will be directly implemented by MoLHUD and does not involve the use of
                      Financial Intermediaries to channel funds to sub-projects.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                      No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                               No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                          No
                       The Borrower's framework will not be used for the IPF component.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             No
                       At this stage, use of Common Approach is not envisaged for the IPF Component.




                    Oct 13, 2025                                                                                                   Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     MoLHUD will publicly disclose the ESCP.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       John Stephen Ajalu                   Title:           Senior Urban Development Specialist

                      Email:                  sajalu@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Phan Thi Phuong Huyen                Job Title:       Senior Urban Specialist

                      Email:                  hphan5@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




Public Disclosure
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                               John Stephen Ajalu, Phan Thi Phuong Huyen

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                      Brenda Joanne Basalwa Sengendo

                     ADM Social Specialist:                             Santiago Estanislao Olmos




                    Oct 13, 2025                                                                                                   Page 9 of 9
