Public Disclosure Authorized                                                FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY


                                                                                                                            Report No: PADHI01310




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                               INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

                                                                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                      ON A

                                                                               PROPOSED CREDIT

                                                                    IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 72.4 MILLION
                                                                        (US$100 MILLION EQUIVALENT)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                     TO THE

                                                              DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

                                                                                      FOR A

                               SRI LANKA REGIONAL EMPOWERMENT THROUGH VIBRANT, INCLUSIVE, AND VIABLE ECONOMIES PROJECT


                                                                                MARCH 2, 2026




Public Disclosure Authorized     Urban, Resilience and Land Global Practice
                                 South Asia Region



                                This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                                duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                   CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

         (Exchange Rate Effective January 31, 2026)

                Currency Unit = SRI LANKAN RUPEE (LKR)
                   LKR 309.25 = US$1
                  US$1.38187 = SDR 1



                        FISCAL YEAR
                  January 1 to December 31




  Regional Vice President:    Johannes C.M. Zutt
Regional Practice Director:   Pankaj Gupta
         Division Director:   David N. Sislen
        Practice Manager:     Abedalrazq F. Khalil
     Task Team Leader(s):     Phoram Shah, Gayatri Singh
                       ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADB          Asian Development Bank
CBSL         Central Bank of Sri Lanka
CBA          Cost-Benefit Analysis
CE           Citizen Engagement
DA           Designated Account
DoA          Department of Archaeology
DS           Divisional Secretariat
E&S          Environmental and Social
ENPV         Economic Net Present Value
EPI          Economic Potential Index
ERD          External Resources Department
ESCP         Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESMF         Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESMP         Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESRS         Environmental and Social Review Summary
FIRR         Financial Internal Rate of Return
FM           Financial Management
FNPV         Financial Net Present Value
GA           Government Agent
GBV          Gender-Based Violence
GFDRR        Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
GFPP         Grant Facility for Project Preparation
GoSL         Government of Sri Lanka
GRM          Grievance Redress Mechanism
HEIS         Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support
IUFR         Interim Unaudited Financial Report
JICA         Japan International Cooperation Agency
LEWIE-Lite   Local Economy Wide Impact Evaluation (Lite Model)
LFP          Labor Force Participation
LKR          Sri Lankan Rupee
LMP          Labor Management Procedures
M&E          Monitoring and Evaluation
MoF          Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
MoTHUD       Ministry of Transport, Highways and Urban Development
MSME         Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises
NAOSL        National Audit Office of Sri Lanka
NDC          Nationally Determined Contribution
NDPF         National Development Policy Framework
NDS          National Development Strategy
NPD          National Planning Department
NSC          National Steering Committee
NWSDB        National Water Supply and Drainage Board
O&M          Operation and Maintenance
PC       Provincial Council
PCC      Provincial Coordinating Committee
PCE      Private Capital Enabling
PDO      Project Development Objective
PIU      Project Implementation Unit
PMU      Project Management Unit
POM      Project Operations Manual
PPSD     Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PPA      Project Partner Agencies
PPP      Public-Private Partnership
RDA      Road Development Authority
RDP      Regional Development Plan
SEA/SH   Sexual Exploitation and Abuse / Sexual Harassment
SEP      Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SOP      Series of Projects
UDA      Urban Development Authority
UNIDO    United Nations Industrial Development Organization
The World Bank
Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS
DATASHEET .......................................................................................................................... ii
I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 1
      A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................1
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................................1
II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 4
      A. Project Development Objective .......................................................................................................5
      B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .............................................................................................5
      C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................6
      D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................6
      E. Role of Partners ..............................................................................................................................10
      F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design....................................................................11
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 12
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................12
      B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ..................................................13
      C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................13
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 13
      A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis (if applicable)............................................................13
      B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................20
V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 23
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 26
            The World Bank
            Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                          Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Sri Lanka                 Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies
                                                      Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID              Financing Instrument
                                                      Classification
                          Investment Project
P511605                                               Substantial
                          Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities

[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                      [✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[✓] Series of Projects (SOP)                                    [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                         [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                               [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                     [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                           [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                  [✓] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                  Expected Closing Date
31-Mar-2026                             30-Jun-2031
Bank/IFC Collaboration                  Joint Level
Yes                                     Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination


Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve access to enabling infrastructure and promote local jobs in selected areas in the Northern Province and
Eastern Province, and in case of an eligible crisis or emergency, respond promptly and effectively to it.

Components
 Component Name                                                                                             Cost (US$)

                                                                                                                     ii
          The World Bank
          Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



 Component 1. Improving Regional Economic Planning and Strengthening
                                                                                                                    5.00
 Institutional Capacity
 Component 2. Catalytic Investments and Promoting Private Sector
                                                                                                                   90.00
 Participation
 Component 3. Project Management                                                                                    5.00
 Component 4. Contingent Emergency Response                                                                         0.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower:                       Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

 Implementing Agency:           Eastern Provincial Council, Northern Provincial Council, Ministry of Transport,
                                Highways and Urban Development



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                            100.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                 100.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                    100.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                    100.00

      IDA Credit                                                                                                  100.00


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

                                                                                                                       iii
         The World Bank
         Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



                                                                                            Guarantee
                          Credit Amount      Grant Amount           SML Amount                           Total Amount
                                                                                              Amount

National
Performance-Based                100.00                 0.00                 0.00                0.00           100.00
Allocations (PBA)

Total                            100.00                 0.00                 0.00                0.00           100.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year               2026          2027           2028               2029             2030         2031          2032

Annual             0.00          10.00          25.00             25.00             23.00        12.00         5.00
Cumulative         0.00          10.00          35.00             60.00             83.00        95.00        100.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                           Contributing Practice Areas
                                                               Water; Transport; Finance, Competitiveness and
Urban, Resilience and Land                                     Innovation; Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue
                                                               Economy

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                                Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                  ⚫ Substantial
2. Macroeconomic                                                             ⚫ Substantial


                                                                                                                       iv
          The World Bank
          Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Substantial
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ High
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Substantial
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Substantial
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Substantial


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                            Relevant

                                                                                                      v
         The World Bank
         Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                       Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
FA, Schedule 2, Section I.A.2; PAs Schedule, Section I. A. 2. The Project Implementing Entities shall establish, by no later
than sixty (60) days after the effective date, and maintain thereafter throughout Project implementation, one (1)
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for each Project Implementing Entity, with functions and responsibilities, qualified
staffing, budgetary resources, and authority necessary and appropriate, in the opinion of the Association, for the
satisfactory implementation of the Project activities under the PIU.
FA, Schedule 2, Section I. B. 1. By no later than sixty (60) days after the Effective Date, the Recipient shall, and shall
cause the Project Implementing Entities to adopt, and thereafter maintain throughout Project implementation, a POM,
in form and substance acceptable to the Association, to carry out the Project.
FA, Schedule 2, Section I.E.1; PAs, Schedule, Section I.D. The Recipient and the Project Implementing Entities shall: (a)
prepare and furnish to the Association not later than September 15 (for the Recipient) and August 31 (for the PIEs) of
each year (as such date may be revised with the prior agreement of the Association and incorporated in the POM)
during the implementation of the Project, a proposed Annual Work Plan and Budget, (b) afford the Association a
reasonable opportunity to exchange views on each such proposed Annual Work Plan and Budget, and shall thereafter
ensure that the Project is implemented with due diligence during said following year, in accordance with such Annual
Work Plan and Budget as shall have been approved by the Association, (c) not make changes, or allow changes to be
made, to the approved Annual Work Plan and Budget without the Association’s prior written approval.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                              Citation                     Description                     Financing Source
                                                               the Subsidiary Agreement
                                                               has been executed on
                                                               behalf of the Recipient and
                                                               the respective Project
                                                               Implementing Entity in a
Effectiveness                     Article IV. 4.01 (a)                                         IBRD/IDA
                                                               manner satisfactory to the
                                                               Association and is legally
                                                               binding upon the Recipient
                                                               and Project Implementing
                                                               Entities
                                                               the Recipient has
Effectiveness                     Article IV. 4.01 (b)         established and                 IBRD/IDA
                                                               operationalized a Project
                                                                                                                          vi
       The World Bank
       Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



                                                          Management Unit (“PMU”)
                                                          in accordance with
                                                          Schedule 2, Section I.A.1(c),
                                                          to this Agreement.
                                                          No withdrawals shall be
                                                          made for eligible
                                                          expenditures under
                                                          Category (4), until and
                           FA, Schedule 2, Section III,   unless the Association has
Disbursement                                                                              IBRD/IDA
                           B. 1. b                        notified the Recipient that
                                                          the conditions set forth in
                                                          Section 5.15 (a) of the
                                                          General Conditions have
                                                          been fulfilled.
                                                          No withdrawals shall be
                                                          made for Complementary
                                                          Financing for the Cat DDO
                                                          under Category (5), until
                                                          and unless: (i) the Recipient
                                                          has furnished to the
                                                          Association a request to
                                                          reallocate and thereafter
                                                          withdraw all or part of the
                                                          Unwithdrawn Credit
                                                          Balance for the
                                                          Complementary Financing
                           FA, Schedule 2, Section III,   for the Cat DDO, and such
Disbursement                                                                              IBRD/IDA
                           B. 1. c                        notice specifies the Cat
                                                          DDO Legal Agreement; and
                                                          (ii) the Association has
                                                          accepted said request and
                                                          notified the Recipient
                                                          thereof, and is satisfied,
                                                          based on evidence
                                                          satisfactory to it, that the
                                                          conditions precedent to
                                                          withdrawal of the financing
                                                          provided under the Cat
                                                          DDO Legal Agreement have
                                                          been fulfilled.
                                                          No withdrawals shall be
                           FA, Schedule 2, Section III,   made for Emergency
Disbursement                                                                              IBRD/IDA
                           B. 1. d                        Expenditures under
                                                          Category [(6)], unless and

                                                                                                     vii
The World Bank
Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



                                                 until all of the following
                                                 conditions have been met
                                                 in respect of said
                                                 expenditures: (i) (A) the
                                                 Recipient has determined
                                                 that an Eligible Crisis or
                                                 Emergency has occurred,
                                                 and has furnished to the
                                                 Association a request to
                                                 withdraw Financing
                                                 amounts under Category
                                                 [(6)]; and (B) the
                                                 Association has agreed
                                                 with such determination,
                                                 accepted said request and
                                                 notified the Recipient
                                                 thereof; and (ii) the
                                                 Recipient has adopted the
                                                 CERC Manual and
                                                 Emergency Action Plan, in
                                                 form and substance
                                                 acceptable to the
                                                 Association.




                                                                                            viii
              The World Bank
              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



 I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
 A. Project Strategic Context
 1.      Sri Lanka is entering a period of cautious but measurable recovery following several years of economic
 contraction. After a cumulative 9.7 percent GDP decline between 2021–2023, early stabilization measures and
 structural reforms have helped restore confidence, with GDP rebounding to projected 4.5 to 5 percent in 2025. Tourism
 has accelerated, remittances remain resilient, and inflation has moderated from double digits to single-digit levels.
 While these gains provide a platform for deeper reforms, vulnerabilities remain. Poverty increased from 11.5 percent
 in 2019 to 27.5 percent in 2023 and is projected to remain near 20 percent over the medium term. Food insecurity
 remains high (33 percent nationally) and the labor market has yet to fully recover, with many jobs lost during the crisis
 not restored. Sustained recovery will require shifting toward productivity-led growth and private-sector investment,
 with a deliberate focus on regions that have lagged behind.
 2.       Sri Lanka’s spatial and economic geography is marked by regional inequalities. Only 18 percent of the
 population lives in urban areas—one of the lowest rates in Asia—limiting the agglomeration benefits required for
 diversified growth. Economic activity and urbanization remain concentrated in the Western Province, which has 28.1
 percent of the population and generates 44 percent of national GDP, while the Northern and Eastern Provinces hold 5.3
 and 8.2 percent of the population1, but contribute only 4 and 5 percent of GDP, respectively.2 Both the Northern and
 Eastern Provinces face higher poverty rates3, skills deficits4, infrastructure gaps compared to their regional peers, limited
 private-sector presence and limited value addition opportunities. 5 Unemployment and underemployment remain
 elevated, particularly among youth and women. A large gender gap persists in Labor Force Participation (LFP), with
 women’s LFP at 27 percent in the Northern and 19 percent in the Eastern, compared to 70 percent and 65 percent for
 men.
 3.       Developing Northern and Eastern Provinces holds significant potential for job creation, poverty reduction,
 and attracting private investment. Together, they encompass nearly two-thirds of Sri Lanka’s coastline, contain some
 of the country’s most distinctive cultural and natural tourism assets, and support more than 30 percent of workforce
 working across fisheries, agriculture, and related value chains. Unlocking regional potential will require strategic
 planning and investments informed by priority regional value chain needs. In parallel, a focus on boosting service
 delivery and livability in emerging urban centers such as Jaffna- will enhance regional competitiveness and help narrow
 long-standing structural disparities. Such an approach aligns with the strategic direction set by the Government of Sri
 Lanka’s (GoSL) National Physical Planning Policy and Plan (2017–2050) and the National Policy Framework (2025-2030),
 which call for strengthening regional growth centers, enhancing connectivity through development corridors, and
 enabling spatially balanced, jobs-led growth.
 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

 4.     GoSL has reaffirmed its commitment to Northen and Eastern Provinces by channeling resources to strategic
 regional programs and investments under the 2025 Citizen’s Budget. Notable focus is on improved service delivery and
 regional connectivity (especially air), boosted tourism and enhanced productivity of fisheries, agricultural and their allied
 industries. The commitment is in line with sector policies and plans, such as the National Tourism Strategic Plan 2026–
 2030, the National Mariculture Policy, and the National Agriculture Policy, among others.



1 Department of Census and Statistics. (2024). Census of Population and Housing 2024. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
2 Central Bank of Sri Lanka. (2024). Provincial Gross Domestic Product (PGDP) – 2023. Statistics Department.
3 In 2019, poverty rates in the Northern and Eastern provinces were at 23.8 and 18.6 percent respectively, well above the national average of 14.3 percent. Source:

Department of Census and Statistics (2022) “Poverty indicators – 2019” Ministry of Economic Policies and Plan Implementation.
4 World Bank. (2018). Shadows of Conflict in Northern and Eastern Sri Lanka: Socioeconomic Challenges and a Way Forward.
5 International Labor Organization (ILO). (2025). Growth Diagnostic Study of Sri Lanka’s Northern Province.

                                                                                                                                                          Page 1
              The World Bank
              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



 5.     Tourism offers an underutilized opportunity to drive growth and boost jobs in the Northern and Eastern
 Provinces, while establishing a pathway to ensure sustainable utilization of the region’s rich biodiversity and natural
 assets. Together, the provinces host more than 60 percent of Sri Lanka’s coastline, a diverse portfolio of nature-based,
 cultural, and historic assets, strong overseas diaspora linkages and proximity to regional markets such as southern India.
 Despite these advantages, tourism activity remains highly concentrated elsewhere – over 70 percent of Sri Lanka’s
 registered tourist accommodation capacity and overnight stays are located in the Western, Southern, and Central
 Provinces, while the Northern and Eastern Provinces together account for less than 10 percent of national tourism
 accommodation capacity, reflecting their relatively minor share of overall tourism activity.6 Poor regional connectivity
 and last-mile access to tourist destinations, inadequate basic service delivery (water supply, drainage, solid waste
 management etc.), weak tourist infrastructure, limited diversification, branding and promotion of tourism offerings
 continue to limit the visitor experience and reduce the length of stay.
 6.     The Government’s new Sri Lanka Tourism Strategic Plan 2026–2030 is being prepared through a nationwide,
 province-level consultative process to ensure that tourism development is tailored to each province’s unique assets
 and constraints. The plan prioritizes diversification away from mass beach tourism toward nature-based, cultural,
 heritage, and marine tourism, and highlights the need for improved connectivity to unlock the tourism potential of
 lagging regions. Building on the ambitious national target announced in the 2025 President’s Budget Speech, of achieving
 US$8 billion in tourism revenue by 2030, the Sri Lanka Tourism Development Authority (SLTDA) has underscored the
 importance of shifting from volume-driven mass tourism to higher-value tourism, noting that current yield per visitor
 remains far below potential.
 7.     Unlocking tourism potential in the Northern and Eastern Provinces will require coordinated, climate-resilient
 investments in basic infrastructure, reliable services, alongside targeted destination development. Limited regional
 connectivity and long travel times by road constrain access to high-potential regional destinations, weakening demand
 and limiting local tourism businesses’ capacity to adapt to climate risks such as seasonality, extreme weather events, and
 service disruptions. Limited basic service provision is an additional bottleneck. For instance, only 19 percent of the overall
 piped water supply coverage is in the Northern Province (versus 60 percent nationally) 7 , and access in the Eastern
 Province remains well below national standards. In Pottuvil, which services Arugam Bay tourist town, hotels face peak-
 season water shortages, while coastal destinations such as Jaffna, Arugam Bay and Passikuda struggle with inadequate
 capacity of the local authorities for solid waste management, reducing competitiveness for higher-value tourism. Past
 investments in the high potential hubs have been fragmented and sector-specific, with weak institutional capacity and
 limited medium term spatial planning, further curtailing impact. A consolidated, spatially targeted program is therefore
 essential to improve basic services and strengthen destination competitiveness.
 8.      Beyond tourism, agriculture and fisheries remain the backbone of the Northern and Eastern provincial
 economies, sustaining one-third of the workforce8 and serving as the primary source of livelihoods for 65 percent of
 the population9. The Eastern Province contributes a quarter of Sri Lanka’s national paddy output, while the Northern
 Province has strong potential for high-value crops and diversified agriculture. Yet despite their economic importance,
 these sectors remain constrained by structural bottlenecks. These include inadequate onshore facilities that hinder
 hygienic fish handling and contribute to significant post-harvest losses, limited value addition at-source, and poor last-
 mile and regional connectivity that is highly vulnerable to climate-induced events—such as flooding and extreme
 weather—disrupting transport, supply chains, and reliable access to markets. These constraints depress producer
 incomes, inhibit private sector investment, and limit the broader growth and employment potential of agriculture and
 fisheries in both provinces.

6 Sri Lanka Tourism Development Authority (SLTDA). (2024). Annual Statistical Report 2023.
7 National Water Supply and Drainage Board – Regional Support Centre (North) official website.
8 Department of Census and Statistics (2023). Sri Lanka Labor Force Survey- Annual Report-2023. Ministry of Finance, Economic Stabilization and National Policies.
9 Northern Provincial Council. (2024). Integrated Rapid Development Plan (IRDP), Northern Province (2024–2026); and Eastern Province Council. (2024). Integrated

Rapid Development Plan (IRDP), Eastern Province (2024-2026).
                                                                                                                                                              Page 2
              The World Bank
              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



 9.       Modern processing and cold-chain capacity in the Northern and Eastern Provinces is extremely limited, with
 most value-addition concentrated in Colombo and other Western Province hubs. As a result, agricultural and fisheries
 produce must be transported long distances for processing, reducing producer margins and increasing post-harvest
 losses. In the East, Cod Bay in Trincomalee is the only reasonably functional harbor, yet its onshore facilities remain
 inadequate and unhygienic. Although state land is available and investor interest exists, institutional and procedural gaps
 related to site coordination and effective public-private engagement have constrained the establishment of processing
 facilities. These constraints weaken local value chains, limit competitiveness, and deter private investment across both
 sectors.
 10.     Climate and disaster risks further compound the structural constraints facing the Northern and Eastern
 Provinces, posing a growing threat to their long-term economic viability and highlighting the urgent need for adaptive
 measures. Sri Lanka’s northern and eastern coastlines, including Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Trincomalee, Batticaloa, and Ampara,
 are among the most exposed in the country to sea-level rise, coastal flooding, shoreline erosion, storm surges, and salinity
 intrusion. Low-lying districts in the Eastern Province face some of the country’s highest flood risks, exacerbated by
 inadequate drainage and poor urban water management. The country’s recurring disasters underscore the substantial
 economic impact of climate and extreme events. Most recently, Cyclone Ditwah caused widespread physical damage
 equivalent to about 4 percent of GDP. 10 These hazards directly undermine productive value chains across tourism,
 agriculture, and fisheries. Coastal erosion threatens beaches and visitor infrastructure, while rising sea temperatures and
 habitat degradation reduces the resilience of marine ecosystems. Increasing extreme heat due to climate change is
 projected to reduce labor productivity and economic output in Sri Lanka, with dry zone areas such as the Northern
 Province among those most exposed to heat stress by 2050.11 Without climate-resilient enabling infrastructure, resilient
 urban services, and support for diversification of climate-affected livelihoods (especially fisheries), these vulnerabilities
 will continue to erode competitiveness and deter private investment, further exacerbating climate-related risks and
 climate-related losses that could reach 3.5 percent of GDP by 2050 and push poverty rates up by nearly 2 percentage
 points.12 A shift toward value-chain-aligned, climate-resilient coastal and urban regeneration is therefore essential to
 safeguard existing assets, unlock the region’s long-term economic potential, and attract private investment.
 11.     Private sector engagement in the Northern and Eastern Provinces remains markedly low, reflecting long-
 standing structural and institutional constraints that have limited investor presence. According to the World Bank’s
 Country Private Sector Diagnostic (2022), only about 2 percent of formal firms operate in the Northern Province and less
 than 4 percent in the Eastern Province.13 Although Sri Lanka has completed nearly 179 Public Private Partnership (PPP)
 projects worth US$5.3 billion, the data from World Bank’s Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Resource Center indicates
 vast majority are concentrated in the Western and Southern regions. Post-conflict recovery challenges, weak enabling
 infrastructure, unresolved land issues, and limited institutional capacity to structure and manage partnerships continue
 to undermine investor confidence. As a result, the two provinces remain heavily dependent on public financing.
 Prioritizing public investments that directly address these constraints by strengthening enabling infrastructure, improving
 institutional readiness for PPPs, and de-risking entry into key value chains, will be essential to crowd in private capital
 and unlock sustained economic growth in the Northern and Eastern Provinces.
 12.     In response to the Government’s request, the World Bank Group has proposed to finance a Series of Projects
 (SOP) to catalyze private sector activation, create jobs and enhance regional competitiveness in the Northern and
 Eastern Provinces. Recognizing the scale and complexity of regional transformation, the SOP is structured as a two-phase
 series spanning 8 years, allowing for: (i) progressive integration and strengthening of economic sectors and value chains;

10 World Bank; Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery. (2025). Global Rapid Post-Disaster Damage Estimation (GRADE) Report: Cyclone Ditwah 2025 - Sri

Lanka (English).
11 World Bank Group, & Asian Development Bank. (2020). Climate Risk Country Profile: Sri Lanka.
12 World Bank. (2025). Sri Lanka Country Climate and Development Report.
13 Compared to more than 60 percent in the more populous Western Province. Source: International Finance Corporation. (2022). Country private sector diagnostic:

Creating markets in Sri Lanka – Private sector-led inclusive growth from islands of excellence.
                                                                                                                                                         Page 3
          The World Bank
          Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



(ii) expansion of investments with private sector mobilization; and (iii) replication of the approach with institutional
capacity building. This Project Appraisal Document presents the first operation in the program—REVIVE SOP1 (US$100
million, FY2026–2031)—which will finance strategic regional development planning, foundational and climate-resilient
infrastructure, and targeted service delivery improvements in selected high-economic potential areas. SOP1 will deploy
site-specific, value-chain-informed interventions aimed at removing binding bottlenecks and crowding in private
investment, while also supporting institutional strengthening and the preparation of investment-ready subprojects for
subsequent phases. The REVIVE SOP2 is expected to build on SOP1 diagnostics and foundational investments. The
tourism value chain is proposed to be further integrated with a parallel Tourism MPA (Tourism for Heritage, Resilience,
Inclusion, and Value-driven Employment Program; THRIVE, P511828) under preparation. The first phase of THRIVE (1,
Colombo) aims to support the national government (in addition to Colombo based investments) in national data
collection, branding and promotion of destinations, which will complement and augment activities under REVIVE SOP1.
The second phase, THRIVE (2, Nature) is expected to build on REVIVE SOP1.
13.    The SOP1 is consistent with the World Bank Group’s Sri Lanka Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY26-30
(under discussion) and with the WBG focus on jobs. The CPF FY 26-30 aims to prioritize job creation through private
sector–led growth supported by private capital–enabling interventions and public capital mobilization. REVIVE aligns with
this approach by focusing on public investments that unlock private sector participation. It directly contributes to the
CPF’s third outcome—Strengthened value chains in tourism and agribusiness, with emphasis on lagging regions —
through targeted support to Sri Lanka’s two lagging provinces - Northern and Eastern Provinces, with a focus on
climate-resilient enabling infrastructure and local enterprise support in high-potential tourism and fisheries clusters.
SOP1 is further aligned with the Bank’s three-pillar jobs strategy: establishing foundational infrastructure, improving
governance and business-enabling conditions, and mobilizing private capital. Accordingly, SOP1 concentrates on priority
job-generating sectors and delivers an integrated package of foundational investments in high-potential clusters in the
two provinces, while strengthening institutions and enabling private sector mobilization.


II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

14.    SOP1 will support a coordinated set of interventions within the selected high-economic potential areas
(hereafter, clusters), anchored in a specific productive sector. Clusters have been selected through a three-stage process
(see more details in Section IV): (i) a rapid assessment of high economic potential zones using an Economic Potential
Index (EPI); (ii) applying the EPI filter to the proposals from provincial and national governments based on their existing
development plans to generate a long list of 15 clusters; and (iii) from the long-list of 15 clusters, prioritization of five
clusters for initial physical investments based on their potential for private sector activation, job creation, and readiness.
15.     Under SOP1, five clusters have been prioritized for physical investments: (i) Jaffna Fort and the surrounding city
area; (ii) Guru Nagar coastal fisheries neighborhood; (iii) Cod Bay fisheries harbor; (iv) Passikuda tourist town; and (v)
Arugam Bay). In addition to these five clusters, two proposed investments—Kokilai Bridge and the Outer Islands in
Jaffna—will receive support for preparatory studies to enhance their readiness for future implementation.
16.    To optimize WBG support to the Northern and Eastern Provinces beyond SOP1, five additional clusters from the
long list have been identified as potentially eligible for support under ongoing or pipeline WBG operations and
technical assistance, subject to the appraisal and recommendation of the National Planning Department (NPD). These
include: (i) the Ampara dairy cluster under the next phase of REVIVE; (ii) the Kilinochchi water supply and (iii)
Nilaveli/Kuchchaveli water supply clusters - supported through water-sector technical assistance on public–private
partnerships; (iv) tourism development in Mannar under the pipeline Nature-Based Tourism project (THRIVE 2 – Nature);
and (v) agribusiness investments under next phase of REVIVE.


                                                                                                                       Page 4
                                 The World Bank
                                  Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



 17.     Joint preparation with IFC has strengthened the identification of opportunities to unlock downstream private
 sector investment and catalyze IFC priorities in the intervention clusters, thus enabling a unified WBG offering to the
 government. These include: (i) aviation connectivity assessments (Northern and Eastern Provinces) and selected
 feasibility studies14; (ii) potential private partnerships investments related to fish processing facilities in Cod Bay cluster
 will likely be further leveraged for downstream mariculture or aquaculture investments; and (iii) project facilitated
 matchmaking of opportunities for medium and large cap firms via a Northern Province carve-out of the national
 Entrepreneurship Fund under development by IFC.
 A. Project Development Objective
 18.     The objectives of the project are to improve access to enabling infrastructure and promote local jobs in selected
 areas in the Northern Province and Eastern Province, and in case of an eligible crisis or emergency, respond promptly
 and effectively to it.

 B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators

                                                                               Figure 1. Theory of Change
                              Development Challenge                     Proposed Interventions                  Intermediate Outcomes                   Outcomes
                                                                 Support regional economic
                                                                 development planning with a focus        Improved regional economic
                              Gaps in the translation of long-
                                                                 on value chains and private sector       planning




    Institutions & Capacity
                              term visions and strategies
                                                                 participation
                              into prioritized investment
                                                                 Support preparatory assessments
                              pipelines                                                                   Key regional investments are
                                                                 and transaction advisory for key
                                                                                                          implementation-ready
                                                                 regional investments                                                             More and better jobs
                                                                                                          Strengthened institutional
                              Limited vertical and horizontal
                                                                 Build capacity of national, provincial   framework for enhanced
                              inter-agency coordination for
                                                                 and local governments for                coordination for multi-sectoral,
                              integrated regional economic
                                                                 improved coordination                    regional development projects
                              development
                                                                                                          through inter-agency coordination
                              Critical gaps in basic             Provide climate-resilient




    Infrastructure & Assets
                              infrastructure and services        infrastructure and services
                                                                                                          Expanded, improved and climate
                                                                 Support investments in tourist
                              Lack of well-developed tourist                                              resilient infrastructure and services
                                                                 assets and value-addition facilities
                              destinations/assets and value-
                                                                 to capture high economic value and
                              addition facilities
                                                                 employment potential
                              Limited private sector             Leverage public infrastructure for       Public private partnerships
                              investment                         private investments                      mobilized                                  Climate-resilient
                                                                 Conduct assessments and action                                                     infrastructure and
                              Market information gaps




    Market & Economy
                                                                 plans for value chains in clusters                                               services for residents,
                                                                                  Growing local enterprises                                            tourists, and
          Lack of coordination among         Establish public-private
                                                                                                                                                        businesses
          public and private stakeholders engagement platform
          Weak local enterprises
                                             Support local enterprises with a
          Limited economic
                                             focus on business development,       Increased private sector investment
          opportunities for local
                                             investment promotion and skills
          communities
   Critical Assumptions (CA): CA1. Sustained political commitment and strong central and local government ownership during the project cycle,
   CA2. Effective intergovernmental coordination between national, provincial, and local authorities for timely decision-making and
   implementation, CA3. Institutional capacity for the necessary technical, financial, and project management capacity to plan, execute, and
   monitor project activities, and CA4. Private sector confidence and engagement to mobilize investment in infrastructure and services.


14 Based on ongoing discussions with the Civil Aviation Authority of Sri Lanka (CAASL), and the Airport and Aviation Services Sri Lanka Private Limited (AASL)

                                                                                                                                                                     Page 5
              The World Bank
              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



 19.      SOP1 will boost access to climate-resilient infrastructure, unlock economic opportunities and create jobs, and
 lay the foundation for private sector engagement. Key activities include regional development planning and institutional
 strengthening, investment in infrastructure, and support to local enterprises. Please see Figure 1. Theory of Change.
 20.        The key PDO level results indicators include:
 (i)        People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number, disaggregated by women and youth)
            (Corporate Results Indicator)
 (ii)       People with more and better-paid jobs (Number, disaggregated by women and youth) (Corporate Results
            Indicator)

C. Project Beneficiaries
 21.     The total estimated number of beneficiaries is approximately 260,000 people, including primarily - local residents
 and fishermen in the selected clusters. In Jaffna, Passikuda and Arugam Bay, the project will benefit over 240,700
 residents by providing access to improved urban and essential, climate-resilient infrastructure services such as drainage,
 waste management and water supply. In the two fisheries clusters—Guru Nagar and Cod Bay—around 10,500 fishers
 and 9,632 fisheries households will gain from upgraded and climate-adaptive onshore infrastructure and value chain
 support. The private sector will also benefit from increased economic opportunities driven by the growth of tourism and
 fisheries with public-private partnerships and value chain development. Additionally, 3,000 new and improved job
 opportunities are anticipated, offering residents and workers income-generating and skills development prospects within
 the tourism and fisheries value chains. Government staff from national, provincial, and local institutions, including the
 Ministry of Transport Highway and Urban Development (MoTHUD), provincial and local authorities, will gain enhanced
 technical capacity and improved coordination mechanisms for sustainable cluster management.

D. Project Components
22.      Project interventions will comprise a set of inter-linked components and activities, aimed at: (i) improving
regional economic planning and strengthening institutional capacity for sustained development; (ii) financing catalytic
public infrastructure investments to attract private investments in selected clusters; and (iii) supporting local enterprises
in the selected clusters, through leveraging infrastructure investment and providing business development support and
skills enhancement to strengthen the value chains, create jobs, stimulate private sector and improve livelihoods.
23.      Component 1. Improving Regional Economic Planning and Strengthening Institutional Capacity (US$5 million)
will be implemented by the MoTHUD in consultation with the Northern and Eastern Provincial Councils (PCs) and other
relevant national agencies and line ministries15, and will finance preparation of Regional Development Plans (RDPs) for the
Northern Province and Eastern Province and support to the preparation of the proposed National Development Policy
Framework (NDPF); capacity building of national and provincial entities to manage integrated, climate-resilient, and
private-sector-responsive development; and preparatory studies and transaction advisory to support the preparation of
priority investments - through technical assistance, consultancy and non-consulting services - to strengthen regional
planning capacity, ensure long-term climate resilience, and guide long-term economic development in the Northern and
Eastern Provinces.
24.    The RDPs will identify policies, priority actions, and institutional requirements for effective integrated regional
economic planning, and for the development of the region and its key economic corridors. It will identify priority climate-
smart infrastructure investments aimed at strengthening and mitigating the impacts of climate change, strategic
environmental and social (E&S) instruments, and financing modalities (including potential public–private partnerships)


15 Relevant national agencies and line ministries, including but not limited to: Finance Commission, Ministries of Fisheries Aquatic and Ocean Resources, Ministry of

Foreign Affair, Foreign Employment and Tourism, Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Lands and Irrigation, Ministry Provincial Councils and Local Governments, among
others.
                                                                                                                                                            Page 6
           The World Bank
           Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



over a 5-year horizon, to align with the proposed medium-term NDPF to be developed by the National Planning
Department, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (MoF). The timeframe of RDPs may be modified
to ensure best alignment with the NDS. Value-chain diagnostics in key sectors—such as tourism, fisheries, and
agriculture—will inform the RDPs by identifying opportunities and constraints to regional competitiveness within the
dominant productive sectors. By embedding climate risk considerations into regional planning and investment
prioritization, the RDPs will provide a framework for climate-resilient development in the region, helping to reduce future
economic losses from climate-related shocks and stresses. The component will also contribute to the preparation of the
NDS.
25.     The component will also support capacity building for relevant national line ministries, the Northern and
Eastern PCs, and local governments to enhance coordination, strengthen their capacity for regional economic planning
and climate-resilient investments, improve operations and maintenance (O&M) of assets created under the project, and
foster collaboration with the private sector.
26.       In addition, the component will finance preparatory studies and transaction advisory, subject to appraisal and
recommendation of NPD, to support the preparation of priority investments that will enhance the region’s connectivity
and competitiveness, positioning them for successful implementation in future. It will include, inter alia, (i) feasibility
studies and potential transaction advisory services for air connectivity, noting that air connectivity is a binding constraint
for exports and tourism; (ii) scoping studies, including climate-resilient options analysis with coastal climate vulnerability
assessment and E&S screening for Kokilai-Pulmodai connectivity, linking the Northern Province to the Eastern Province;
and (iii) sustainability and feasibility assessment for eco-tourism investments such as in the Jaffna outer islands or other
fragile ecosystems with tourism potential in Northern and Eastern provinces, which can unlock tourism potential in a
sustainable way. Selected priority investments and interventions identified under RDP may also receive preparatory
assessments and transaction advisory support under the component.
27.      Component 2: Catalytic Investments and Promoting Private Sector Participation (US$90 million) will finance
infrastructure investments in priority clusters, with the aim of activating the private sector, strengthening climate
resilience, and promoting economic growth. It will support: (i) integrated packages of infrastructure, service delivery, and
site improvements in the clusters; and (ii) local economic development, targeting firms and businesses in the clusters, to
stimulate private sector and job creation.
28.     Sub-component 2.1: Climate-resilient Infrastructure and Site Improvements (US$82 million) will be
implemented by MoTHUD in consultation with the Northern and Eastern PCs and relevant national Ministries, and will
finance area-based packages of investments, including construction and rehabilitation of climate-resilient infrastructure,
site improvements, and service delivery to strengthen key economic activities and stimulate job creation, through the
provision of civil works, goods and equipment and services in the following sectors, inter alia,: (i) tourism and cultural
heritage enhancement; (ii) fisheries infrastructure upgrading; and (iii) urban regeneration and service delivery
improvements. Enabling infrastructure and support for local service delivery to ensure the sustainability and
competitiveness of the investments will also be financed. Key activities include:
   (i) Tourism and cultural heritage enhancement: Upgrading cultural and touristic sites in selected clusters through
       improved service delivery, façade restoration, adaptive reuse of spaces and buildings, improved pedestrian
       pathways, shaded seating, parking rehabilitation, nature-based streetscaping with enhanced stormwater drainage
       system, waterfront and beachfront parks, climate-resilient access roads, lighting, green spaces, night markets, and
       tourist amenities such as information centers, bike lanes, and vendor areas.
   (ii) Fisheries infrastructure upgrading: Improving onshore facilities and service delivery, inter alia hygienic landing,
        handling, and sorting areas, auction halls, markets and food stalls, waste management systems, access roads, and
        energy-efficient lighting, climate-resilient infrastructure and coastal protection measures within existing harbor
        footprint with attention to climate-induced extreme weather events.

                                                                                                                       Page 7
              The World Bank
              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



    (iii) Urban regeneration and service delivery improvements: Upgrading enabling urban infrastructure and service
          delivery with, inter alia, integrated climate adaptation measures, including climate-resilient roads designed to
          withstand and function during flooding and inundation; drainage and stormwater considerations incorporated into
          infrastructure design standards and site-level investments (including nature-based solutions) to reduce localized
          flooding and manage increased rainfall intensity associated with climate change; water supply systems; and solid
          waste management—to improve connectivity, resilience, and the reliability of services for residents, firms, and
          visitors. The expansion of green spaces and public parks will help manage the effects of climate change (for
          example, absorbing excess rainwater and reducing runoff to manage stormwater, lowering temperatures, and
          improving air quality) and help conserve biodiversity and environmental ecosystems.
29.     Collectively, these investments will enhance tourist experience, extend visitor stays and spending, and improve
the efficiency and safety of key economic activities, contributing to more livable, resilient, and economically vibrant
clusters.
30.      Rehabilitation and construction of infrastructure and site improvements will integrate disaster risks, prioritize
climate adaptation, and enhance mitigation measures. All infrastructure investments and site improvements will be
informed by climate and disaster risk screening, focusing on relevant hydro-meteorological and coastal hazards, and will
integrate appropriate, site-level measures to strengthen sustainability, resilience, and adaptive capacity. Design standards
will incorporate climate-resilient engineering specifications where relevant and feasible, including flood-resilient and
wind-resistant construction, protective measures in coastal and flood-prone areas, and drainage and stormwater
considerations integrated into infrastructure design standards to address localized inundation. Design standards will also
integrate nature-based and low-regret solutions where applicable, such as conserving or enhancing existing natural
vegetation and natural features (including mangroves where present) to help buffer coastal flooding and manage rainfall
runoff. The project will include energy-efficiency improvements, considerations for reducing waste, the use of local and
low-carbon materials, and enhanced water-use efficiency where feasible. The expansion or enhancement of green spaces
and public parks will help manage climate impacts by absorbing excess rainwater and reducing runoff, lowering
temperatures and mitigating heat-island effects, improving air quality, and supporting local biodiversity and
environmental ecosystems. All project-supported infrastructure, where feasible, will integrate gender-responsive and
safety-enhancing measures.
31.      The sub-component will also promote PPPs through the assessment, design, preparation, and implementation
of potentially viable transactions. It will finance public infrastructure to attract private investments in the clusters, where
private sector entities are willing to invest but require complementary public infrastructure to make their investment
viable. Preliminary market sounding has indicated potential PPP opportunities in Jaffna Fort (heritage area), water supply
provision in Arugam Bay, and fish processing facilities at Cod Bay Harbor. Final selection of PPP investments will be based
on feasibility studies and consultations with both public and private stakeholders, initiated under the Grant Facility for
Project Preparation (GFPP)16. Project financing may support the public infrastructure components of PPP arrangements,
including through viability gap funding by financing of works contracts, where such investments are necessary to enable
private sector participation.
32.       Sub-component 2.2: Support for local enterprises, investment promotion and destination development (US$8
million) will be implemented by the Northern and Eastern PCs in collaboration with local governments. It will finance
strengthening of local enterprises, informed by value chain assessments, including, inter alia, skills development,
investment promotion, business development, product development and diversification, market positioning, investment
facilitation, and support for selected pilot activities through the provision of technical assistance, consulting and non-
consulting services, small works, goods, and equipment. It will also strengthen the capacity of the provincial and local
governments to ensure effective implementation and potential scaling up of activities. Activities under this component

16 World Bank’s Grant Facility for Project Preparation (GFPP) became effective on September 1, 2025, and provided US$1 million to ensure high quality project design

and accelerated project readiness through funding for the preparation of feasibility studies and key environmental and social assessments, among others.
                                                                                                                                                           Page 8
           The World Bank
           Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



will also leverage and align with the overarching national-level support under THRIVE 1 for strengthening tourism skill
development and destination promotion. Inter alia, key activities under sub-component 2.2 will include the following:
33.      Support for local enterprises and investment promotion will strengthen the capacity of enterprises operating
within priority clusters and enable greater private participation. The sub-component will finance value chain assessments
to identify productivity gaps, skills need, and investment opportunities, as well as specialized economic and market studies
to inform private-sector-enabling measures. Activities will include: (i) market positioning and destination-level planning
to promote site-specific investments, including O&M strategies and activation of visitor sites; (ii) market-informed capacity
building and skills training for tourism enterprises, fisheries workers, firms, and cooperatives; and (iii) identification and
provision of tailored business development support—including tourism product development, branding, adoption of
digital solutions, and logistics/equipment support to improve market access. Selected proof-of-concept business plans
that demonstrate viable private sector participation models may receive support to pilot implementation, subject to
feasibility, stakeholder buy-in, and scalability potential.
34.      Support for destination development will include institutional capacity to operationalize tourism circuits at the
provincial and local level, with considerations for carrying capacity, climate risk screening, robust climate adaptation, and
disaster-risk mitigation. Areas of support will also include developing niche tourism products—such as community-based
tourism, gastronomy, agribusiness, handicrafts etc. Strategies will be prepared through a participatory process involving
communities and private sector stakeholders and will result in time-bound, prioritized investment programs with
identification of financing, marketing, and branding plans.
35.     This sub-component will also provide business development support for MSMEs and local entrepreneurs, with
a particular focus on women-led enterprises. Areas of support will include: (i) strengthening business skills through
structured training and mentorship, delivered through technical assistance and incubators and, where relevant,
coordinated with IFC’s Entrepreneurship Fund (a parallel activity under preparation); (ii) fostering product development
and innovation by linking market demand with local craftsmanship and delivering market-informed capacity building; (iii)
supporting businesses to expand into new markets and diversify products; and (iv) establishing a public–private dialogue
platform to facilitate regular engagement between government and local businesses, and developing replicable models
for private sector participation. Dedicated skills-development programs will be provided for women entrepreneurs.
Capacity building of provincial and local governments to ensure effective implementation and scaling-up of the activities
under this sub-component will also be financed.
36.    Component 3: Project management (US$5 million) will provide institutional and technical support for day-to-day
administration, monitoring and coordination of project activities to the Project Management Unit (PMU); the Northern
Province Project Implementation Unit (PIU); and the Eastern Province PIU.
37.      Sub-component 3.1 Project Management Support for PMU (US$3 million) will be implemented by MoTHUD and
will finance project staff salaries, consultant hiring, and operating costs for the PMU. It will support the administration,
monitoring and coordination of project activities, while ensuring effective project management, fiduciary oversight
(financial management, procurement and audits), E&S compliance, regular results monitoring and timely progress
reporting in coordination with the PIUs. It will also support the capacity building of the PMU, through training in fiduciary,
safeguards, and project management aspects. In addition, it will fund beneficiary perception surveys and impact
evaluations (baseline, midline, and endline) to establish a baseline and track the project’s impact. Furthermore, the
component will allocate resources for preparatory activities to scale the project to additional regions or for follow-on
engagements, as needed.
38.      Sub-component 3.2 Project Management Support for PIUs (US$2 million) will be implemented by the Northern
Province PIU and the Eastern Province PIU and will finance PIU staff salaries, consultant hiring, and operating costs for the
PIUs. It will support the administration, monitoring, and coordination of project activities to be implemented by PIUs,


                                                                                                                       Page 9
          The World Bank
          Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



while ensuring effective project management, fiduciary oversight (including financial management, procurement, and
audits), E&S compliance, regular results monitoring, and timely progress reporting.
39.    Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million). This zero-cost component enables the provision
of immediate response to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, as needed, such as through the rapid reallocation of funds from
balances of other project components for immediate response and recovery in case of an eligible crisis or emergency.
40.    MOTHUD will be responsible for Components 1, 2.1 and 3.1, while the two PCs will be responsible for
Components 2.2 and 3.2. For component 2.2 (US$8 million), budget will be allocated equally – US$4 million for each PC.
For Component 3.2, the budget will be allocated equally - US$1 million for each PC.

E. Role of Partners
41.    SOP1 seeks to actively build synergies with other development partners working in the Northern and Eastern
Provinces.
                          Table 1: Development Partner Interventions and Potential Synergies
 Name                          Nature of Involvement /Description
 Asian Development Bank        Water and Sanitation: ADB is active in the water sector in Northern Province (Jaffna-
 (ADB)                         Kilinochchi Water Supply and Sanitation Project). In the North, ADB plans to support
                               the first phases of the Jaffna Sewerage project that will provide sewage treatment
                               plant and sewage connections to communities in Jaffna city center. This area includes
                               the vicinity of the Jaffna Fort and locations where the REVIVE interventions are
                               planned. Tourism: ADB has an on-going tourism project that focuses on Fort
                               rehabilitation in Trincomalee districts. Marine tourism roadmap and other TA work
                               focuses on Passikuda and Mannar, along with support for policy actions under the
                               Ministry of Tourism. Passikuda is identified as one of the clusters under REVIVE, and
                               opportunities for synergies between these interventions will be explored. Fisheries:
                               ADB through its NE Province Coastal Community Development Project has worked in
                               Trincomalee, Batticaloa, Ampara (Eastern Province) to promote redevelopment of Sri
                               Lanka’s East Coast through better management of natural resources, focusing on
                               environmental protection and poverty reduction via improved fisheries and coastal
                               ecosystem management.
 Japanese International        JICA is engaging with Northern and Eastern provinces through the Rural Infrastructure
 Cooperation Agency            Development Project supporting small-scale local infrastructure, including roads,
                               water supply, and wastewater.
 International Water           Water: IWMI has carried out groundwater assessment and community-led
 Management Institute          engagement for water monitoring in the Jaffna Peninsula and capacities of public
 (IWMI)                        sector institutions have been built.
 European Union/ Food and      UNIDO and FAO are supporting agricultural value chains (banana, cassava, vanilla, and
 Agriculture Organization/     coconut) via technical support to small and medium enterprises along the chain
 United Nations Industrial     aimed at domestic and export market access under the BEPSA-FOOD project.
 Development Organization
 Government of                 Dutch development partners funded wall restoration in Jaffna fort in 2017 and have
 Netherlands                   shown interest in further partnering on Fort rehabilitation.


                                                                                                                 Page 10
              The World Bank
              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)




F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
42.     Investing in livability, quality infrastructure, and service delivery enhances a location’s competitiveness by
attracting businesses and talent. The success of economic growth interventions depends on resilient infrastructure and
high-quality services that support firms and workers. This has been demonstrated in regional development projects
focused on the tourism sector 17 in Georgia, Albania, the Kyrgyz Republic, and Armenia. The Horn of Africa Initiative:
Regional Economic Corridor Project (P174485) unlocked economic potential through a blend of hard infrastructure
investments—such as roads and terminals—alongside policy reforms, PPPs, and private sector engagement. Building these
lessons, the project will invest in climate-resilient infrastructure in high-economic potential areas that are anchored in the
tourism and fisheries sectors. These interventions are expected to generate immediate construction jobs, stimulate
sectoral growth, and catalyze private sector investment.
43.     Regional economic development approaches that strategically align infrastructure, institutional capacity, and
private investment along economic value chains – have proven effective. For instance, the Second Regional Economic
Development Project in the Kyrgyz Republic (P175587) adopts a cross-sectoral approach that combines technical
assistance, infrastructure enhancement, and support for productive partnerships in agricultural value chains to tackle
regional economic challenges. The Senegal River Valley Development and Resilience Project (P179449) take a regional,
cross-border perspective by establishing value chain platforms and investing in infrastructure to strengthen economic
integration and connectivity across national boundaries. The Cluster Competitiveness Initiatives under the Upper Egypt
Local Development Program (P157395) empowered governorates to lead sector-focused development, resulting in
strengthened businesses with improved production and market linkages, and increased jobs across agribusiness and
handicrafts clusters through public-private dialogue and strengthened institutional capacity. These examples demonstrate
that clustered investments in infrastructure and institutions along economic value chains offer a viable strategy for
creating enabling environments that attract private sector participation with a view towards regional growth and job
creation.
44.       Adopt a graduated and flexible approach to project design and implementation to remain responsive to
complex local realities and evolving contexts. The project design allows for iterative refinement based on continuous
learning and feedback. This includes a stepwise rollout of Component 2.2 to support local enterprises, anchored in value
chain assessments, with identified actions subsequently operationalized. These initiatives will be supported by ongoing
monitoring, review, and adaptive adjustments throughout the project lifecycle. The project leverages the SOP framework
to facilitate a phased approach that demonstrates early impact, builds trust, and prepares subsequent phases.
45.      Lessons from past projects highlight the importance of strategic planning, strong institutional capacity, and
effective coordination mechanisms. A lack of strategic direction18, narrow focus on physical reconstruction, inefficient
resource use, and weak responsiveness to local needs19 in post-conflict reconstruction efforts have resulted in sub-optimal
outcomes, leaving much of the infrastructure underutilized. Past World Bank projects in the provinces—such as the North
East Local Services Improvement Project (P113036) and the Local Development Support Project (P163305)—also
highlighted the need for strategic, coordinated infrastructure planning and strong government-community dialogue. The
project will finance preparation of regional economic development plans that will align both sectoral and geographic
priorities, with a specific focus on integrating climate adaptation strategies, while implementation arrangements will
ensure coordination across relevant line ministries and across national-provincial-local administrations. Provincial PIUs
will also be supported to strengthen their ability to coordinate, plan, and manage provincial-level infrastructure, while


17 Georgia: Regional Development Project (P126033), Second Regional Development Project (P130421), Third Regional Development Project (P150696); Albania: Project

for Integrated Urban and Tourism Development (P155875); Kyrgyz Republic Regional Economic Development Project (P167428); and Armenia Tourism and Regional
Infrastructure Project (P504282).
18 Economic Development Framework for a Norther Province Master Plan (2018). Document commissioned by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka
19 World Bank. (2018). “Shadows of Conflict in Northern and Eastern Sri Lanka: Socioeconomic Challenges and a Way Forward”

                                                                                                                                                       Page 11
           The World Bank
           Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



aligning with national initiatives (such as National Tourism Strategy). Public-Private stakeholder platforms and
consultations will ensure community engagement.

 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION
 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
46.      The MoTHUD, and Northern and Eastern PCs will be responsible for the overall execution of the Project.
Implementation will be coordinated through the PMU housed at MoTHUD. The PMU will be staffed with key personnel
including Project Director, Deputy Project Director, Financial Management Specialist, Accountant, Procurement Specialist,
Procurement Officer, Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) Officer, Technical Experts (as required), Senior Environmental
Specialist, Senior Social Development Specialist, Health and Safety Specialist and Gender/GBV specialist. The PMU’s core
responsibilities will include day-to-day implementation of activities—such as field supervision and quality assurance,
procurement, contract management, fund disbursement and financial reporting—engagement with the private sector to
facilitate PPPs, maintaining compliance with E&S framework, coordinating with Provincial PIUs for project activities and
progress reporting.
47.      Two Provincial PIUs will be established - one at each of the Northern and Eastern PCs - to support effective
project execution at the provincial level. Each PIU will be staffed with a Deputy Project Director, Financial Management
Specialist/Accountant, Procurement Officer, Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) Officer, Technical Experts (as needed),
Environmental Specialist, Social Specialist and Health and Safety Specialist, and other supporting staff as necessary. PIUs
will play a key role in coordinating with provincial and local government entities to ensure timely and efficient
implementation of project-specific activities. The responsibilities of the PIUs will include implementing project activities
in Sub-components 2.2 and 3.2, including procurement, E&S clearances, contract management, and monthly reporting to
the PMU and Provincial Coordinating Committees (PCC) on progress, challenges, and achievements, coordinating with the
private sector for implementing project activities.
48.      Project Partner Agencies (PPAs) will assist the PMU in implementation of various activities agreed under project
components. The PPAs may include Roads Development Authorities and Civil Aviation Authority; National Water Supply
and Drainage Board; SLTDA; Fisheries departments; Coastal Conservation Department; Archeological Department;
relevant local authorities, among others. Other agencies can be identified as PPAs, when relevant support is required. The
key responsibilities of PPAs include, in collaboration with the PMU, PIUs, and design and supervision consultants: (i)
support the preparation of investments in prioritized clusters, including the development of implementation plans, review
of technical designs, and facilitation of required clearances, etc.; (ii) supervise the implementation of investments and
report to the PMU/PIUs on progress and quality; (iii) conduct and/or supervise required assessments and studies; (iv)
assist the PMU in ensuring compliance with the project’s E&S safeguards; and (v) commit to the future operation and
maintenance of the delivered infrastructure. There would be no flow of funds to these entities.
49.      To ensure effective coordination and guidance on strategic directions, the project will be overseen by the
National Steering Committee (NSC) and PCC. The NSC will comprise the Governors and Chief Secretaries of the two
recipient Provinces, Secretary of MoTHUD, representatives from other relevant Ministries, the NPD and the External
Resources Department (ERD), Finance Commission, and other relevant agencies and departments. The NSC will be
responsible for: reviewing overall project implementation progress, addressing policy-level challenges, providing guidance
for strategic decisions, ensuring coordination and alignment between national and provincial stakeholders, and facilitating
timely allocation of project funds. The NSC shall convene on a semi-annual basis, under the chairmanship of the Secretary
of MoTHUD, with additional special sessions convened as needed. The PCC will be established in each province to ensure
effective technical coordination among governmental entities for the timely implementation of project activities at the
provincial level. The PCC will include provincial representatives from central agencies, official relevant provincial
representatives, Divisional Secretaries, and official representatives from relevant local authorities, as needed. The PCC will
be chaired by the respective Chief Secretaries and convened quarterly.

                                                                                                                      Page 12
           The World Bank
           Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)




50.     The specific roles and responsibilities of all entities mentioned above will be detailed in the Project Operations
Manual (POM), which will be developed by the PMU, in collaboration with two PIUs, and submitted to the Bank for no-
objection.

 B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements
51.      The MoTHUD and the two PCs will be responsible for monitoring and evaluation of results. The PMU at MoTHUD
will oversee results monitoring and evaluation. Progress toward the PDO will be tracked through the project’s Results
Framework. The PMU, with support from PIUs, will establish a dedicated M&E system to collect and compile data. The
results indicators will be monitored in line with the frequency and methodology defined in the Results Framework matrix.
The PMU will coordinate with both provincial PIUs to ensure consistent reporting across provinces and compile PIU
reporting, along with progress on PMU-led activities, to produce a consolidated semiannual progress report. Beneficiary
feedback survey and impact evaluation will be conducted. A mid-term review expected in 2028 will provide a structured
opportunity to assess the project implementation performance and introduce any necessary adjustments to enhance
efficiency, relevance, and impact.

 C. Disbursement Arrangements
52.      The disbursement methods under the project will include advance, reimbursement, direct payments, and special
commitments. Three dedicated US dollar-denominated Designated Accounts (DAs) will be opened at the Central Bank of
Sri Lanka (CBSL) and managed by the PMU at the MoTHUD and two provincial PIUs. The World Bank will provide advances
to the DAs based on a six-month cash forecast, and funds will be used exclusively for eligible project expenditures.
Disbursements to the DAs will follow a report-based approach. The World Bank credit will finance to cover the necessary
eligible expenses to achieve the PDO, with a focus on efficiency and cost-effectiveness. Project funds will be transferred
through banking channels, and expenditure will be reported by the recipient through interim unaudited financial reports
(IUFRs). Quarterly IUFRs will be submitted to the World Bank by the PMU and two PIUs within 45 days of the end of each
quarter. The entire disbursement process will follow the World Bank disbursement mechanisms. If the World Bank
determines that the credit proceeds have been used to finance ineligible expenditures, the GoSL will refund such amounts
to the World Bank.


 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY

A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis (if applicable)
53.      REVIVE SOP1 represents the first and foundational phase of WBG financing for GoSL’s broader and longer-term
efforts for regional economic development, focusing on the Northern and Eastern Provinces, for which strong political
commitment is reflected in governments plans, policies and budgets. In alignment with the Government’s vision, SOP1
prioritizes investments that will deliver economic benefits, generate jobs, and attract private sector participation.
Technical Analysis
54.       Prioritization and Selection of Clusters. The project adopted a spatial approach to identify high-economic
potential areas which, if supported, can unlock economic potential of the Northern and Eastern Provinces. The selection
of these high-potential clusters was guided by stakeholder consultations, economic potential analysis, and review of
national and provincial development plans and priorities. Jobs, economic growth, and private sector potential – were key
filters used for selecting foundational infrastructure investments, with an aim to shift from building sectoral infrastructure
to building infrastructure for jobs. Clusters have been selected using a three-stage process:



                                                                                                                      Page 13
              The World Bank
              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



     (i) Rapid Economic Potential Index (EPI) Assessment: EPI20 served as a diagnostic tool to identify locations with
         relative strengths in key indicators of economic growth and job creation, including: sectoral potential, including
         access to tourist hotspots, tourism accommodation, fisheries and agriculture potential; local infrastructure,
         measured through road density, water infrastructure, and access to healthcare facilities; and agglomeration
         economies, population density, human capital, domestic and international market access, GDP per capita,
         settlement footprint, MSME count, and jobs.
     (ii) Review of Government plans: proposals from provincial and national governments, aligned with their existing
          development plans, were reviewed to compile a long list of investment needs in the high economic potential
          zones. These plans included the Integrated Rapid Development Plans (2024–2026) of the Provinces, UDA’s Urban
          Development Master Plans, SLTDAs master plans for tourist destinations and Eastern Province Tourism Master
          Plan, among others.
     (iii) Prioritization and final selection: A set of 15 clusters21 were shortlisted based on consultations, review of plans,
           and EPI analysis. A prioritization framework, using private potential, co-located investments, and implementation
           readiness as key criteria, further refined the selection. As a result, 5 clusters are prioritized for implementation in
           SOP1. A few additional investments in the long list of clusters will be taken up for preparatory assessments with
           the aim to make them ‘implementation-ready’ (see paragraph 14).
55.     Project Design. The project’s design is built on technical and analytical work, complemented by broad
consultations internally across the Bank’s Global Practices and externally with government entities, development partners,
private sector, and communities.
     (i) Design of Coordinated Investments in Five Priority Clusters. Building on government plans and available
         analytical work, the Bank team assessed opportunities for coordinated, multi-sector investments across the five
         prioritized clusters. A design firm with global experience in area-based development has been engaged to support
         the government this effort and to shift from ad hoc interventions toward targeted, co-located investments that
         collectively enhance each cluster’s economic potential. The conceptual designs consider economic prospects,
         social and cultural characteristics, and environmental factors, and incorporate climate-resilient features and
         adaptation measures proposed to address risks such as localized flooding, extreme heat, etc. A rapid strategic
         options review is underway for the two fisheries clusters—Gurunagar and Cod Bay—including layout design
         alternatives, onshore infrastructure needs, and functional zoning, to inform detailed investment designs in these
         two clusters.
     (ii) Private Sector Opportunities: During preparation, the PPP and private sector engagement opportunities have
          been assessed for each cluster. These were validated through a preliminary market-sounding workshop and
          targeted consultations with developers, contractors, financiers, and tourism-sector stakeholders. Project design
          incorporates a range of models for enabling and mobilizing private capital, informed by both investor perspectives
          and government priorities.
     (iii) Value chain assessment: Value chain diagnostics of the fisheries and tourism sectors identify constraints and
           opportunities for private investment and local economic development. Preliminary findings—based on data
           analysis, field visits, and stakeholder consultations— shape the design of activities under Sub-component 2.2 and
           the integrated infrastructure investments proposed under Sub-component 2.1.
     (iv) Stakeholder Consultations: Extensive consultations with communities, provincial authorities, sectoral agencies,
          and private stakeholders have informed the selection and refinement of investment packages, helping ensure that


20 Roberts, Mark. (2016). Identifying the Economic Potential of Indian Districts. Policy Research Working Paper; No. 7623. World Bank.
21 Northern Province: Jaffna City, Guru Nagar, Outer Islands (including Delft Island), Kilinochchi, Pooneryn, Mullaitivu, Mannar, Vavuniya. Eastern Province: Kanthale,

Passikuda, Batticaloa town, Kalmunai, Arugam Bay, Nilaveli, Cod-Bay.
                                                                                                                                                             Page 14
          The World Bank
           Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



        the proposed solutions are practical, culturally appropriate, cost-effective, and aligned with local development
        priorities.
56.      Readiness for Implementation. The project has been designed with a strong focus on early implementation
readiness. Civil Works investments amounting to approximately US$80 million have been identified, and the Government,
with Bank support, is advancing procurement preparation to allow key packages to be tendered ahead of the project
effectiveness. Through the GFPP, the Government has initiated the procurement of the consultancy to prepare site specific
E&S instruments, feasibility studies for all clusters, market sounding for PPP opportunities and carry out baseline
assessments for monitoring and evaluation. Conceptual designs and pre-feasibility studies have been completed for Jaffna
Fort, Passikuda, and Arugam Bay clusters. To streamline procurement and avoid delays, detailed design and supervision
will be bundled into two contracts (one per province), while civil works will be packaged into single contracts per cluster
to reduce procurement and contract management burden. Civil works tenders, covering up to 20 percent of total project
financing, are on track to be launched within the first year of implementation.
57.    All site-level interventions have been screened for environmental and social impacts, and appraisal-stage
instruments have been prepared to ensure that mitigation measures and associated costs are fully integrated. Terms of
Reference (TORs) for hiring an E&S consultancy have been prepared and will be launched under GFPP, and bidding
documents will incorporate E&S provisions consistent with World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs). The
Bank will also support the integration of E&S requirements into TORs across Components 1 and 2.
58.     Under GFPP, recruitment of key PMU consultants has begun to ensure continuity and a fully staffed PMU at
effectiveness. Subject to satisfactory performance, these consultants will be retained for the full duration of
implementation. Collectively, these measures are expected to position the project for efficient implementation.

Paris Alignment and Climate Co-Benefits.
59.      The project is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation, and it is
anticipated to deliver substantial co-benefits specific to climate adaptation. The project is consistent with Sri Lanka’s key
national climate initiatives, including the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) 3.0, the Sri Lanka Climate Prosperity
Plan 2022–2050, the revised National Policy on Climate Change (2023), the 2050 Carbon Net Zero Roadmap and Strategy
(2023), and the National Adaptation Plan for Climate Change Impacts in Sri Lanka (2016–2025). Project activities will
directly advance priority actions for adaptation and climate resilience, particularly through the application of climate-
resilient infrastructure solutions that mitigate risks associated with climate-induced extreme events and flooding
disasters. With regards to mitigation, Sri Lanka has committed to reduce GHG emissions by 20.09 percent by 2035,
including an unconditional 8.11 percent reduction (as outlined in the NDC 3.0). The project’s activities will remain fully
consistent with the country’s low-emission development priorities and strategies.
60.     Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The project is not at the material risk of having any negative impact
on Sri Lanka’s low GHG emissions development pathways as all the activities under Component 1 and 2 financed are
Universally Aligned (UA). The activities under Component 1 are comprised of targeted technical support for long-term,
sustainable regional development initiatives in two provinces, which will integrate potential climate vulnerability scenarios
and resilience perspectives for regional development plans. The activities under Component 2.1 will incorporate climate
impact mitigation measures across relevant supported interventions, with a focus on energy efficiency improvements in
the newly constructed productive infrastructure for fisheries and tourism, the use of local and low-carbon materials,
enhanced water use efficiency, and improved collection and segregation of solid waste. The project will also finance
climate-resilient road construction or rehabilitation of existing onshore fisheries infrastructure and tourism facilities
designed to ensure all-year access.
61.    Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. Risks from climate hazards have been assessed (please see
paragraph 10) and will be addressed via climate sensitive implementation to reduce them to an acceptable level of residual

                                                                                                                     Page 15
           The World Bank
           Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



risk. Especially, Component 2 activities aim to enhance the resilience of infrastructure and communities, thereby reducing
adaptation risks associated with climate change and other environmental challenges as follows:
(i) Rehabilitation of tourism facilities and cultural heritage assets (estimated US$19 million), such as visitor infrastructure
and facilities, will be informed by climate and disaster risk information and will incorporate appropriate design measures,
where relevant and feasible, to mitigate climate risks related to coastal flooding, intense rainfall, saline intrusion, and heat
stress. Facility rehabilitation will integrate energy-efficient design measures where feasible, including improved wall and
roof insulation, passive ventilation, and efficient cooling systems, to enhance thermal comfort and reduce energy demand
during hotter periods. Waste reduction, reuse of materials, and water-use efficiency measures will be incorporated into
the design of such investments, as appropriate, recognizing water scarcity risks in the Northern and Eastern Provinces.
(ii) Rehabilitation, improvement, and expansion of public spaces (estimated US$16 million) will emphasize climate-
responsive landscape design, including the use of native, low-maintenance, and drought-tolerant vegetation to reduce
water demand while supporting coastal and urban ecosystems. Site-level drainage and stormwater management
measures, integrated into public space upgrades, will help strengthen stormwater management and reduce localized flood
risks associated with increasingly intense rainfall events. The expansion of green and blue infrastructure—such as
permeable surfaces and urban parks—will help absorb excess rainwater, reduce runoff, mitigate localized flooding, and
reduce urban heat-island effects in dense urban and tourism clusters.
(iii) Climate-resilient road investments in selected clusters (estimated US$5 million) will enhance adaptation by reducing
vulnerability to flooding, extreme heat, and erosion through improved alignment, site-level drainage considerations,
climate-appropriate materials, and design standards, where relevant and feasible. These measures will improve the
reliability of connectivity and reduce climate-related disruptions to communities, tourism flows, and supply chains,
particularly in coastal and low-lying areas of the Northern and Eastern Provinces.
(iv) Strengthening productive assets (estimated US$22 million)—such as post-harvest facilities, fish landing sites, trading
centers, and local markets— will be informed by consideration of relevant climate risks facing the fisheries sector, and will
incorporate appropriate, climate-resilient siting and design measures where applicable, to reduce climate-related
vulnerabilities and support the functioning of fisheries-based value chains.
(v) Preparatory works under Component 1—covering feasibility and design studies for connective infrastructure—will
assess potential climate risks and integrate climate risk considerations into the studies to guide future investments toward
low-carbon and climate-resilient options.
Citizen Engagement.
62.       A public–private dialogue platform will be established under component 2 for engaging with multiple stakeholders
at all levels—from central ministries and provincial departments to district administrations and local authorities—along
with development partners and interest groups such as relevant civil society organizations (CSOs) and diaspora
communities and the private sector. In addition, the project will ensure structured consultations with relevant
stakeholders in designing investment packages and inclusive participatory planning processes for infrastructure
preparation, site promotion, and entrepreneurship. The conceptual designs of selected interventions will be developed in
participation with residents, community groups, and stakeholders—including women, youth, and the elderly—as well as
professional and expert communities (for example, heritage specialists for the preservation of Jaffna Fort and
environmental conservation organizations for Passikuda and Arugam Bay marine tourism sites). The project will conduct
satisfaction surveys to monitor the beneficiaries’ satisfaction for the project interventions.
63.     The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will specify the use of feedback loops with beneficiaries to demonstrate,
at each stage, how their input has been considered and integrated into the design of site-specific activities. The SEP will
also detail the operationalization of an accessible and inclusive Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to ensure that the
concerns of interested and affected people are addressed effectively and in a timely manner. The Results Framework will

                                                                                                                        Page 16
              The World Bank
              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



include two indicators to track the progress of citizen engagement: (i) Beneficiaries satisfied with project interventions
(residents, businesses, tourists –disaggregated by gender) (Percentage); and (ii) Grievances received that are processed
within the stipulated service standards (Percentage).
Gender
64.     Female labor force participation (LFP) in Northern and Eastern provinces is well below the average national
average of 31.6 percent – at 27 percent and 19 percent, respectively.22 Women-owned businesses account for about 25
percent of SMEs in Sri Lanka.23 Most women-led enterprises in these regions are micro-enterprises engaged in small-scale
agriculture, retail, and food processing, facing major barriers to starting and scaling sustainable businesses. Qualitative
research 24 on women’s entrepreneurship in Jaffna District identified key bottlenecks faced by women entrepreneurs
including limited access to capital, inadequate infrastructure, lack of business and technical skills, and minimal exposure
to formal training in areas such as accounting, marketing, and digital tools. Domestic responsibilities including childcare,
social norms, and stigma around women’s economic participation, and increasing cases of gender-based violence (GBV)
in public spaces (19 percent in 2016 to 29 percent in 2020 in the Northern Province 25) - further restrict mobility and
decision-making. Nearly 90 percent of women have experienced harassment on public transport26, and safety audits have
highlighted poor lighting, unsafe bus stops, and inadequate walkways.
65.      To address this gap, the project focuses on creating an enabling environment for women’s economic opportunities
through inclusive value chain analysis and investment design, complemented by infrastructure improvements that
improve safety. Under Component 2, the value chain diagnostic, strategy, and action plan will prioritize women-led
businesses and employment in tourism and fisheries – both highly labor-intensive sectors. The analysis will apply a gender
lens to examine women’s employment patterns and barriers faced by women-led enterprises. The component will also
provide targeted support to women-led enterprises through dedicated skills development, business advisory services, and
improved access to markets. From the outset, the project will engage women’s community-based organizations to reach
women entrepreneurs and provide tailored support that meets their specific needs. By strengthening their technical,
managerial, and digital capabilities, the project will enable women to expand economic opportunities and participate
more competitively in tourism and fisheries value chains. The project will also improve safety and accessibility in
infrastructure, including new tourism and fisheries facilities, with adequate lighting and awareness initiatives on GBV and
referral mechanisms, such as hotlines in these facilities, public spaces, and streets. Activities will be designed and
implemented through community consultation, ensuring women’s participation and representation by organizations
advocating for women’s issues. The project will measure progress closing gender gaps using the PDO indicator ‘New
enterprises established or existing enterprises with expanded operation (Number)’, targeting 50 percent women-led and
women-owned businesses. In addition, the intermediate gender indicator “Women reporting increased perception of
safety and accessibility in public spaces (percentage)” will capture improvements in women’s safety and accessibility to
infrastructure.
Maximizing Finance for Development-E (MFD-e)/ Private Capital Enabling (PCE)
66.     The project is aligned with the World Bank Maximizing Finance for Development approach and private investment
generated through the project is counted towards PCE. The following Components are verified as MFD-e: Component 1
will support the RDP and strengthen the enabling environment for private investment by improving public-private
coordination, regulatory clarity, and market-validation in long-term strategic planning. Further, by assessing various
economic and job-generating sectors, RDP will identify binding constraints and actionable reforms to enhance


22 Department of Census and Statistics. (2023). Sri Lanka Labor Force Survey - Annual Report 2023.
23 Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative (WEFI). (2024). Women Entrepreneurs: creating jobs, building future.
24 Selvarajan P. & Thayani S. (2022). The Challenges Faced by Women Entrepreneurs in Jaffna District of Sri Lanka.
25 Sivakumar, Krijah. (2021). Gender Discriminatory Social Norms and Their Impact on Rights and Freedoms of Women: Participatory Research in the Northern Province.

Colombo: Law and Society Trust and Chrysalis.
26 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). (2015). Does she travel safe?

                                                                                                                                                         Page 17
              The World Bank
               Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



competitiveness, reduce transaction costs, and crowd-in private investment. Also in Component 1, the project will analyze
and propose solutions for addressing critical connectivity bottlenecks, which have long impeded private sector expansion
in North and East provinces by financing feasibility studies and preparatory assessments. Component 2 will remove key
physical and operational barriers through climate-resilient and productive infrastructure investments such as upgraded
fisheries landing sites, logistic infrastructure, and tourism assets and amenities. These improvements will help attract
private capital by creating a better enabling environment and opening opportunities for new and expanded sector
investment in hospitality, food and retail, and fisheries-related processing. The project has been tagged as MFD-e.
67.     The following Component are verified as PCE: Component 2 provides targeted support to strengthen private
sector participation through: (i) market-informed business development support to local enterprises within the tourism
and fisheries sectors; and (ii) identifying and structuring specific PPP opportunities. Examples include a potential PPP for
the Jaffna Fort rehabilitation as well as potential private participation in developing onshore facilities in Cod Bay Harbor
and in water supply in Arugam Bay and Passikuda. PCE will be monitored through a non-monetary indicator, “New
Enterprises established or existing enterprises with expanded operation (Number)” and a monetary indicator, “Private
Capital Enabled by designing market-validated PPP projects (USD)”. The volume of private investment expected has been
estimated based on (i) strengthening 500 service-sector MSMEs within the supported clusters, resulting in an average 5
percent annual increase in turnover among those targeted enterprises and (ii) targeting around US$8 - 10 million27 to be
leveraged through potential PPP projects facilitated by the project. The project has been tagged as PCE.
Economic Analysis.
68.      A Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) for tourism-related benefits was conducted for each tourism cluster (Jaffna Fort,
Passikuda, and Arugam Bay). The Financial Net Present Value (FNPV), Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR), Economic
Net Present Value (ENPV), and Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) were calculated for the next 15 years, considering
the estimated 6-year project implementation period and a 10-year asset lifespan up to 2040. Cost and benefit streams
were calculated for each cluster separately, due to differences in baseline information, scale of the intervention, structure
of the visitor flow, and spending patterns across the clusters.28 The analysis considers the economic planning and cluster
initiatives and infrastructure costs from Component 2.
69.      The primary economic benefits of the project are expected to come from the following streams: a) Increase in
tourist arrivals, overnight stays, and spending. As a result of the project, both domestic and international tourist arrivals
and tourists’ length of stay are expected to gradually increase during the last three years of project implementation.29 For
the Jaffna Fort cluster, additional revenue from ticket sales to new visitors was also considered. b) Economic benefits from
secondary sales. There will be three sources for secondary sales - economic benefits from incremental tourist
expenditures, temporary job generation during the construction of the project's infrastructure and sales from goods and
materials required by the construction of the project and supplied locally.30
70.     The primary financial (monetary) benefits of the project are expected to come from the following streams: a)
tax revenues from an incremental increase in tourist arrivals, overnight stays, and spending; b)tax revenues from
secondary sales; c) tax revenues from property value appreciation; d) taxes from temporary job generation from

27 The estimated volume of private investment was based on PPP opportunities identified in two priority clusters under the project: (i) Cod Bay Harbor and (ii) Jaffna

Fort. Applying conservative assumptions, enabled private capital is estimated at 35-50 percent of the associated public investments, based on revenue-generating
assets and facilities in each cluster.
28 Baseline figures for overnight stays, daily spending, and tourist flow segmentation were estimated using initial survey data from Jaffna City, Arugam Bay, and the

Strategic Tourism Zone Easter Province Master Plan for Passikuda. Due to increased activities and the attractiveness of clusters, an extra half-night stay is being
considered after 2030.
29 The baseline scenario for tourism growth was based on Sri Lanka’s Compound Annual Growth Rate of 7.19% for tourist flow from 2005 to 2024 (source: Strategic

Tourism Zone Easter Province Master Plan Report, 2025). Four annual tourist arrival growth scenarios attributable to the project were considered: 1) 7% baseline growth
during the first three years of the project; 2)9% during the construction phase; 3) 11% in the growth phase starting in the final project year; and 4) 8% stabilized growth
from project completion through 2040.
30 Data on income multipliers for tourism expenditure (direct and indirect/induce), income multipliers for construction labor, purchase of construction materials, and

estimation of the percentage of materials sourced locally, were derived from the initial estimations of Local Economy Wide Impact Evaluation (LEWIE-Lite).
                                                                                                                                                                Page 18
              The World Bank
              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



construction and from sales from goods and materials from construction supplied locally. Fiscal impact analysis indicates
that the tax revenues generated by tourism-related activities following the project's implementation exceed the project
costs. The FNPV for the project, using a 9 percent discount rate, equals US$107,692,562, and the FIRR equals 21 percent.
71.     Overall, the implementation of the project in tourism clusters will generate net incremental economic benefits
beyond the project costs. For the calculation of the economic benefits, financial costs (investment and operation and
management costs) and benefits were adjusted by excluding taxes, using relevant conversion factors, and applying
shadow prices to accurately reflect the costs and benefits associated with the project. The economic impact analysis
indicates that the total economic benefits from tourism-related activities after project implementation significantly exceed
the total costs – ENPV for the project at a 9 percent discount rate is US$269,601,087 and the economic EIRR is 39 percent.
72.     A sensitivity analysis for tourism clusters was conducted to assess the robustness of the results, considering (a)
higher discount rate at 11 percent, b) 10 percent increase in project costs, (c) tourism impacts occurring two years later
than expected (starting in 2031). Under all cases, the overall expected economic and fiscal NPV remained positive (see
Table 2).
                         Table 2. Cost Benefit and Sensitivity Analysis from Tourism Clusters
 Scenario                           EIRR (%)         ENPV (US$ million)          FIRR (%)                                            FNPV (US$ million)
 Baseline                             39%                    269.6                 21%                                                     107.7
 Higher discount rate (11%)           39%                    211.9                 21%                                                      77.1
 Costs increase by 10%                36%                    261.7                 20%                                                      91.0
 Benefits lag 2 years                 30%                    190.7                 16%                                                      62.5


73.      A CBA for fishery-related benefits was prepared for two clusters: Guru Nagar Fisheries Town and Cod Bay
Fisheries Harbor. The analysis estimates that the expected economic benefits will be from reduced harvest loss and value
addition. The economic benefits will come from improved fishing infrastructure, including berthing and landing
infrastructure, post-catch processing, trading venues, and basic infrastructure needed for efficient, safe, and hygienic
handling of the catch. The results indicate that the project component in fisheries is economically viable, with a net present
value (NPV) of US$24,316,554 at a 9 percent discount rate and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 33 percent. Since several
benefits were not quantified in monetary terms, for example, additional opportunities for further commercialization and
exports, it likely underestimates the real benefits of the project. The economic analysis supports the project’s focus on
improving onshore fishery infrastructure to reduce post-harvest losses.
74.      The analysis estimates that around 3,000-3,500 more and better jobs will be created during the project
implementation phase (up to 2031), and around 23,000 more and better paid jobs over the 15-year period of the
assessment. These figures account for labor income generated by the project from tourism activities and jobs from
infrastructure construction for direct employment. 31 The number of jobs generated during project implementation is
lower than the 15-year projection as most tourism growth and related income benefits are expected to occur after project
completion. Income and wage multipliers were derived from the Local Economy Wide Impact Evaluation (LEWIE-Lite)
estimates—a local general equilibrium model that assesses the economy-wide impacts of investments using survey data.
Likewise, additional direct jobs will be created through support for local tourism and fisheries enterprises under
component 2.2.



31  Around 3, 500 direct jobs are expected by 2031, and 23,200 direct jobs by 2040. Additionally, 1,400 indirect/induced jobs will be created during project
implementation, and 7,600 in the 15-year period of assessment. The total additional labor income attributable to the project, obtained by the income and wage
multipliers from tourism benefits and construction labor, was divided by the district median average wage reported in the 2024 Sri Lanka Labor Force Survey Annual
Report (Department of Census and Statistics).
                                                                                                                                                        Page 19
           The World Bank
           Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



B. Fiduciary
75.    The project’s Financial Management (FM) arrangements include planning, budgeting, accounting, internal
controls, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing in accordance with the fiduciary requirements of the World Bank
operational policies for IPF. The PMU set up under MoTHUD will be responsible for overall FM coordination and
monitoring of project activities. It will maintain FM arrangements at all project implementation levels and ensure
compliance with all financial covenants in the Financing Agreement. Two Provincial PIUs will be responsible for FM
coordination of respective investments in each province including ensuring compliance with the financial covenants
related activities implemented by them. The PMU and two PIUs will be staffed with qualified FM personnel. Full-time FM
specialists in the PMU and the Provincial PIUs will serve as focal points for FM coordination with the World Bank. All fund
transfers would be between bank accounts, and no cash transfers would take place. The accounting and payment
functions related to the components managed by MoTHUD will be centralized at the PMU and most of the funds and
payments will be handled by the PMU with the supporting documents provided by other implementing agencies.
Payments related to activities carried out by the Northern and Eastern PCs will be made by the PIUs established under
PCs. Detailed FM arrangements will be reflected in the Project Operations Manual.
76.     Budget. MoTHUD, Northern PC and Eastern PC will be responsible for managing their respective budgetary
allocations for the entire project based on annual budget estimates of the GoSL. Separate budget codes (line items)
covering both direct foreign financing and counterpart financing will be allocated to the project under MoTHUD and
Northern and Eastern PCs for the respective components managed by them in the GoSL’s annual estimates. Counterpart
financing for expenses that are considered non-eligible under the project financing (for example, additional allowances,
staff salaries, salary top-ups, among others) will be made available by the MoF as per standard practice in Sri Lanka. PMU
and PIUs will prepare Annual Work Plans that will inform the budget requirements of the MoF, through MOTHUD and
finance commission respectively.
77.     Fund Flow. Three Designated Accounts (DAs) will be established: one at PMU level and two additional DAs at two
provincial PIUs – Northern and Eastern Provinces respectively. These accounts will be used to track payments made using
World Bank proceeds. Exchange losses incurred when transferring funds from the DAs to the LKR accounts will not be
eligible for World Bank financing. The PMU and two PIUs may also request direct payments to suppliers through CBSL and
the World Bank.
78.    Audit. The project will be subject to internal and external audits to ensure transparency and proper use of funds.
Internal audits will be conducted by the project appointed/designated internal auditors under the PMU and PIUs, while
external audits will be carried out annually by the National Audit Office of Sri Lanka (NAOSL), covering all project activities
and payments. The PMU and PIUs will prepare annual financial statements that will be audited by NAOSL. The final audit
reports will be submitted to the World Bank within six months of the financial year’s end. In addition to the project
financial statements, PIUs shall submit their annual financial statements to PMU, and the latter will prepare the
consolidated financial statements for submission to the Auditor General.
79.     FM Risk. The World Bank assessed the FM capacity of the MoTHUD and the Northern and Eastern PCs. At present,
the MoTHUD and the PCs operate independently under their respective mandates and do not collaborate on daily
activities. While the two PCs oversee most of their own FM arrangements, their familiarity with World Bank operations is
limited and significant capacity gaps remain. Currently, the residual FM risk is considered high because both the MoTHUD
and the PCs face continued capacity challenges, and PCs have not yet directly managed Bank-funded operations, although
the MoTHUD have some prior experience. This high risk is expected to persist until the PMU and two provincial PIUs are
established, staffed with sufficient FM personnel, and can demonstrate satisfactory FM arrangements over a reasonable
implementation period.
80.    All procurement under the project will follow the World Bank Procurement Regulations for Investment Project
Financing (IPF) Borrowers: Procurement in IPF - Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting Services – Seventh Edition,

                                                                                                                       Page 20
          The World Bank
          Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



September 2025 (Procurement Regulations), and the provisions of the Financing Agreement. Compliance with the World
Bank’s Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits
and Grants (amended July 1, 2016) is mandatory. Procurement will be guided by the agreed Project Procurement Strategy
for Development (PPSD), Procurement Plan (PP), and POM. All stakeholders—including the PMU, two provincial PIUs,
bidders, and service providers—are required to uphold the highest standards of ethics and integrity in accordance with
the governance and anti-corruption provisions of the Procurement Regulations. National framework for public
procurement in Sri Lanka is governed by the GoSL Procurement Guidelines and Manual (2024), and the National
Procurement Commission ensures governance, transparency, and accountability across the public sector. The project will
use the World Bank approved Standard Procurement Documents (SPDs) for contracts financed under the project, ensuring
consistency with relevant GoSL Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Department of Public Finance and CIDA,
where appropriate, particularly for national and provincial procurements.
81.     Institutional Arrangements and Procurement Processes. Procurement will be carried out by the PMU and the two
Provincial PIUs, with the PMU serving as the overall coordinating body. The PMU will be responsible for conducting the
procurements under its mandate and for overseeing fiduciary compliance, quality assurance, and the consolidation of all
procurement activities through STEP, including those implemented by the Provincial PIUs. The PMU will also jointly lead a
capacity-strengthening program with the World Bank. The Provincial PIUs will implement procurement for activities
assigned to them in the approved PP, within the threshold limits defined in the POM. The PMU and each Provincial PIU
will be staffed with qualified procurement personnel. The PPSD, prepared by the PMU, covers all procurement anticipated
under the project.
82.    Procurement Risk and Mitigation. Procurement capacity assessments were conducted for the MoTHUD, the
Northern and Eastern PCs. Although MoTHUD has some prior experience with Bank-financed projects, this was several
years ago, and procurement for REVIVE will be led by a new team. The PCs handle their own procurement independently,
with varying familiarity with Bank procedures. The project requires intensive coordination, since the MoTHUD and PCs
operate under different structural and procedural arrangements, posing challenges to cohesion, planning, and fiduciary
oversight. In addition, the procurement portfolio includes complex contracting modalities, such as PPP activities and
design build approaches, further elevating fiduciary risk. Given these factors, the overall procurement risk remains rated
High. To support implementation, the Bank will open Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) for the project.
Detailed procurement procedures, thresholds, approval processes, and operating modalities will be set out in the POM to
ensure clarity, consistency, and effective oversight across all levels.
83.     National procurement conditions. In accordance with paragraph 5.3 of the Procurement Regulations, when
approaching the national market (as specified in STEP), the country’s own procurement procedures may be used. All
Consultancy Services shall be procured following Procurement Regulations and World Bank’s SPDs. When the Borrower
uses its own national open competitive procurement arrangements as set forth in the GoSL Procurement Guidelines, such
arrangements shall be subject to paragraph 5.4 of the Procurement Regulations and the following conditions: “In
accordance with paragraph 5.3 of the Procurement Regulations, the request for bids/request for proposals document shall
require that Bidders/Proposers submitting Bids/Proposals present a signed acceptance at the time of bidding, to be
incorporated in any resulting contracts, confirming application of, and compliance with, the World Bank’s Anti-Corruption
Guidelines, including without limitation the World Bank’s right to sanction and the World Bank’s inspection and audit
rights.” Further shall be subject to following conditions when applying national procurement procedures: (a) only bidding
documents acceptable to the Bank shall be used for all national open competitive procurement; (b) the request for
bids/request for proposals document shall require that bidders/proposers submitting bids/proposals present a signed
acceptance at the time of bidding, to be incorporated in any resulting contracts, confirming application of, and compliance
with, the Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines, including without limitation the Bank’s right to sanction and the Bank’s
inspection and audit rights; and (c) the eligibility of bidders shall be as defined under Section III of the Procurement
Regulations. In case of any inconsistency between the procurement arrangements based on GoSL Procurement Guidelines
and the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations, the latter shall prevail.
                                                                                                                   Page 21
             The World Bank
              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
     Legal Operational Policies                                                                               Triggered?
     Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                              No
     Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                                        No



84.     The environmental risk classification is “Substantial.” Both technical assistance and civil works are expected to
generate impacts of medium magnitude and spatial extent, with a low likelihood of serious adverse environmental effects,
though some cumulative and indirect impacts are anticipated. Preliminary E&S screening has been completed for the
physical investments financed under Component 2. Screening identified that works may result in dust, noise, erosion and
sedimentation, waste generation, impacts on water quality and marine biodiversity, and occupational and community
health and safety impacts. No works are planned in protected areas but some works, if not managed in accordance with
the Bank’s Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines and good international industry practices, could impact critical
habitat areas within the Jaffna and Trincomalee lagoons.

85.     Technical assistance will likely have similar downstream and indirect impacts to those listed above. RDP
implementation can result in cumulative impacts (e.g., land clearance, waste generation, multiple water discharges etc.)
and connectivity investments in similar indirect impacts, which will be addressed through the completion of landscape
level E&S assessments and E&S screening and assessments, respectively. Operational risks and impacts may include the
consumption of water and energy, waste generation, and ongoing discharges. These risks and impacts will be managed
through the development and implementation of operational Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs).

86.      An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed, consulted, and disclosed
during project preparation, including an E&S screening procedure.32 Final E&S assessments will be confirmed early in
implementation on confirmation of the activities that will be financed under each Project Implementation Agency.
Mitigation measures will be confirmed through the development and implementation of environmental and social impact
assessments (ESIAs), ESMPs, and may be supported by additional studies and management plans to address specific risks
and impacts such as biodiversity and changing coastal processes.

87.     The project’s social risk classification is substantial, reflecting the scale and context of works in dense urban
environments and the potential for short-term but manageable impacts, including those supported under the technical
assistance component. While major land acquisition or resettlement is not anticipated since activities will occur on
government-owned land, localized livelihood disruptions may arise during civil works. Key social risks include: (a) potential
temporary or permanent displacement of informal vendors due to stall removal or market reconfiguration, which may
interrupt daily trade and income; (b) temporary livelihood impacts from restricted access to fishing landing sites and jetty
operations in two clusters, affecting fish landings and market access; (c) temporary disruptions to access and mobility for
households, businesses, and public institutions, including homes, shops, bus stands, schools, and religious centers; (d)
occupational and community health and safety risks from civil works in congested areas, such as exposure to dust and
noise, open excavations, heavy machinery movement, and inadequate traffic management; (e) Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) risks linked to labor influx near settlements, particularly where workers are housed
within communities; (f) cultural heritage risks affecting archaeologically and religiously significant sites; (g)

32
   ESCP, ESMF, and SEP have been disclosed in-country by MoTHUD on November 28-29, 2025:
https://www.moudh.gov.lk/web/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=558&Itemid=380&lang=en. The same documents have been disclosed on the
World Bank’s website on December 11 and 15, 2025, and updated documents were redisclosed on February 16, 2026: https://projects.worldbank.org/en/projects-
operations/document-detail/P511605
                                                                                                                                                   Page 22
          The World Bank
           Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



disproportionate impacts on poor and vulnerable groups if beneficiary selection or access criteria are inequitably applied;
and (h) social tensions from inadequate consultations or perceived unfairness in allocation of upgraded spaces and
services. These risks will be mitigated through inclusive design to minimize displacement, livelihood assistance for affected
groups, phased construction with provision of alternative sites, robust health and safety measures including traffic
management, SEA/SH prevention and response actions, and cultural heritage protection measures. All interventions will
follow comprehensive stakeholder engagement and conflict-sensitive principles to ensure diverse views are considered,
and vulnerable groups are not disproportionately impacted. Environmental and Social measures will be embedded in
instruments: ESMF, Resettlement Planning Framework (RPF), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), Labor Management
Procedures (LMP), and a SEA/SH Action Plan. Landscape-level assessments will guide regional development planning, and
technical assistance will comply with the Bank’s ESSs.
88.       The SEA/SH risk of the project is ‘Substantial” and determined through the application of the World Bank’s
SEA/SH Risk Rating tools for Major Civil Works and the Social, Protection and Jobs. This rating is based on the prevailing
levels of sexual violence and the vulnerabilities of women headed households in the project areas, potential for labor
influx, and the interaction between project actors and local communities, particularly in regions with existing
vulnerabilities. To mitigate these risks, the project will integrate appropriate SEA/SH prevention and response measures
into its environmental and social instruments. A GBV/SEA Action Plan will be developed to address these risks specifically
and tailored mitigation and response measures, which will be included as a commitment in the ESCP.

Grievance Redress Services:
89.      Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm
occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution
Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute
resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the
attention of Bank Management, and Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how
to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For
information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit
https://accountability.worldbank.org.


V. KEY RISKS

90.     The overall risk to achieving the PDO is Substantial. Risks rated Substantial or higher are detailed below.

 Risk Rating, Description and Mitigation Measures
 Political and Governance: Substantial
 Description: The elections in 2024 have restored a degree of political legitimacy and public confidence. Currently, there
 is a strong commitment from the national and provincial administrations to the project, however, there is a possibility
 that priorities may shift in the future due to any changes in the government, its coalition or relationship between the
 center and the two provinces.
 Mitigation Measures: The project, through the provincial and national steering committees, will maintain close
 communication between the Bank, the national and provincial governments, and ensure activities to be financed have


                                                                                                                      Page 23
         The World Bank
         Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



broad consensus across governments, provinces and communities (including an emphasis on community engagement
activities embedded within design consultancies).
Macroeconomic risks: Substantial
Description: Sri Lanka’s path towards sustainable economic growth remains narrow, with modest growth prospects.
While macroeconomic stability has advanced, recovery remains contingent on steadfast reform implementation.
Mitigation Measures: WBG monitors the macro-economic situation of the country through regular updates. There is
an ongoing dialogue between GoSL and WBG on macro-issues, which will continue during the project implementation
period and beyond.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability: Substantial
Description: Limited institutional capacity at provincial levels and weak coordination among central, provincial, and
local agencies could delay implementation and reduce overall effectiveness.
Mitigation Measures: The project will strengthen implementation arrangements with a dedicated PMU managed
centrally at MoTHUD, and PIUs at the provincial level with clearly defined roles. It will also establish a coordination
mechanism with provincial PIUs, with clearly defined accountability and reporting lines. The PMU, PIUs and other
relevant agencies will be supported by technical assistance and capacity-building for implementing and monitoring
project activities. The steering committee at the center and coordination committee at provincial level will ensure
strategic direction, coordination, appropriate handover and ownership.
Fiduciary: High
Description: The MoTHUD has prior experience with Bank-financed projects; however, the PMU team is new and has
limited experience of World Bank FM and Procurement Regulations. Provincial staff have limited exposure to Bank-
financed operations and contract management, STEP and record keeping systems. Finally, the project includes large
civil works and consultancy contracts, including PPP-linked components, which may be affected by poor market
response or weak contract management.
Mitigation Measures: The project will appoint experienced FM staff and a dedicated Procurement specialist in the PMU
and PIUs. It will provide orientation and hands-on training on Bank Procurement and STEP throughout the
implementation period. To avoid coordination issues, the POM will include clearly defined roles and thresholds with
clear approval hierarchy and workflow. Majority of the large procurement contracts for civil works (almost 80 percent
of project budget) will be handled centrally by the PMU, which will help avoid multiple layers and streamline
procurement processes. The project will also undertake early market engagement during project preparation and prior
to each procurement launch, apply fit-for-purpose procurement methods, and strengthen contract supervision.
Environmental and Social: Substantial
Description: Both technical assistance and civil works are expected to result in impacts that are medium in magnitude
and spatial extent and have a low probability of serious adverse effects to the environment. while some cumulative and
indirect impacts are expected. No activities are planned within protected areas or critical habitats. No significant
resettlement impacts are also anticipated, other than short-term and manageable livelihood disturbances during civil
works. SEA/SH risks are rated as Substantial.
Mitigation Measures: E&S screenings are completed for identified clusters and E&S risks management instruments
have been prepared and disclosed for the project. Detailed E&S assessments and site-specific instrument preparation
are underway to inform the design of the investments & manage the associated risks. In addition, a robust E&S
management system will be established during implementation, incorporating early and inclusive stakeholder
consultations, effective grievance redress mechanisms, and dedicated staffing to ensure full compliance with ESSs.
Stakeholder: Substantial
Description: The multi-sectoral nature of the project will require engagement with multiple government departments
and agencies, diverse groups of community members, and private sector stakeholders. However, the diversity of
stakeholders and the limited capacity of MoTHUD and PCs to ensure systematic outreach may pose challenges.


                                                                                                                Page 24
        The World Bank
         Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



Mitigation Measures: The coordination with various government departments will be ensured by the steering
committee and provincial coordination committees. Feedback from the community will be regularly sought, including
through the consultations during implementation, public-private sector stakeholder engagement process, and GRM
mechanism.




                                                                                                           Page 25
       The World Bank
         Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                                                                                    Closing Period
   Improved access to climate-resilient infrastructure
   People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people) CRI
   Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
   0                                                                                           260,000
     ➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people)  CRI

   Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
   0                                                                                           130,000
     ➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
   0                                                                                           75,000
   Promote local jobs
   People with more and better-paid jobs (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
   0                                                                                           3,000
     ➢People with more and better-paid jobs - Female (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
   0                                                                                           1,500
     ➢People with more and better-paid jobs - Youth (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
   0                                                                                           900


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                                                                             Closing Period
   Component 1. Improving Regional Economic Planning and Strengthening Institutional Capacity




                                                                                                                Page 26
    The World Bank
      Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


Strategic Regional Development Plans Prepared (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
0                                                                                           2
Preparatory studies and technical assessments completed for future implementation (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
0                                                                                           3
Central, regional and local government staff benefiting from capacity building activities (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
0                                                                                           100
  ➢Central, regional and local government female staff benefiting from capacity building activities (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
0                                                                                           45
Component 2. Catalytic Investments and Promoting Private Sector Participation
Tourism facilities/sites/public parks rehabilitated or constructed (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
0                                                                                           5
On-shore fisheries related facilities upgraded (Number)
Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
0                                                                                           5
New enterprises established or existing enterprises with expanded operations (Number of businesses)
Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
0                                                                                           500
  ➢New enterprises established or existing enterprises with expanded operations (disaggregated by women-led) (Number of businesses)
Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
0                                                                                           250
Beneficiaries satisfied with project interventions (Percentage)
                                                                                            Jun/2031
                                                                                            85
Private Capital Enabled by designing market-validated PPP projects (Amount(USD))
Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031
0                                                                                           8,000,000
Women reporting increased perception of safety and accessibility in public spaces (Percentage)
Mar/2026                                                                                    Jun/2031




                                                                                                                                      Page 27
    The World Bank
      Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


0                                                                                       80
Component 3. Project Management
Grievances received that are processed within the stipulated service standards (Percentage)
Mar/2026                                                                                Jun/2031
0                                                                                       80
Component 4. Contingent Emergency Response




                                                                                                   Page 28
           The World Bank
           Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

Improve access to climate-resilient infrastructure
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people, disaggregated by women and youth) (Corporate Results
Indicator)
                                   This indicator will measure the number of people (gender- and youth-disaggregated), including local
                                   residents within the clusters and surrounding areas, who will benefit from infrastructure investments
Description
                                   supported by the project that will apply more climate-smart and resilient practices during the intervention
                                   period.
Frequency                          Semi-annual
Data source                        Progress reports prepared by PMU
Methodology for Data Collection M&E surveys
Responsibility for Data
                                   PMU & PIUs
Collection
Promote local jobs
People with more and better-paid jobs (Number of people, disaggregated by women and youth) (Corporate Results Indicator)
                                   The aggregate number of people who gain employment as a direct or indirect result of project activities
                                   (disaggregated by gender and youth). This includes: (i) direct temporary jobs created through construction
                                   and maintenance works under fixed-term contracts during civil works; (ii) direct permanent jobs created
Description                        through project interventions that support new and rehabilitated infrastructure and value chain facilities and
                                   targeted support for local MSMEs and entrepreneurs, resulting in new long-term employment opportunities;
                                   and (iii) indirect jobs potentially generated through enhanced economic activity within the tourism and
                                   fisheries sectors in the project-supported clusters.
Frequency                          Semi-annual
Data source                        Progress reports prepared by PMU
Methodology for Data Collection M&E surveys
Responsibility for Data
                                   PMU & PIUs
Collection


Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components

Component 1. Improving Regional Economic Planning and Strengthening Institutional Capacity
Strategic Regional Development Plans Prepared (Number)
                                    This indicator measures the number of Strategic Regional Development Plan (RDP) prepared. This plan
                                    includes: (i) strategic policies and priority actions for integrated regional economic planning in Northern
                                    and Eastern provinces, (ii) specific measures and investments in infrastructure and value chains for regional
Description
                                    development and opportunities including climate-resilient infrastructure and public-private partnership; (iii)
                                    indicative budgets and financing strategies; (iv) institutional requirement and decision-making procedures;
                                    and (v) a phased implementation timeline.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         Progress reports prepared by PMU
Methodology for Data Collection     Progress reporting by PMU
Responsibility for Data Collection  PMU & PIUs
Preparatory studies and technical assessments completed for future implementation (Number)
                                    This indicator tracks the number of preparatory assessments that are developed for identified investments
                                    in the additional clusters. The preparatory assessments can include technical assessments, feasibility and
Description                         sustainability assessment, scoping studies, and detailed engineering designs (as applied). It may cover: i)
                                    larger-scale regional connectivity infrastructure, including air connectivity and Kokilai-Pulmodai
                                    connectivity, ii) Jaffna outer islands and other fragile ecosystems with tourism potential in Northern




                                                                                                                                           Page 29
           The World Bank
              Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                                    province, and iii) other investments identified and prioritized. The completion of the assessments implies
                                    that the relevant agency will provide formal clearance.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         Progress reports prepared by PMU
Methodology for Data Collection     Progress reporting by PMU
Responsibility for Data Collection  PMU & PIUs
Central, regional and local government staff benefiting from capacity building activities (Number, disaggregated by gender)
                                       This indicator tracks the number of government staff at different levels (national/regional/local), who have
                                       received training for capacity building. The capacity building for relevant national line ministries, Northern
Description                            and Eastern Provincial Councils, and local governments aims to enhance coordination, strengthen their role
                                       managing regional economic planning and infrastructure development, improve operations and
                                       management of assets created under the project, and foster collaboration with the private sector.
Frequency                              Semi-annual
Data source                            Progress reports prepared by PMU
Methodology for Data Collection        Progress reporting by PMU
Responsibility for Data Collection     PMU & PIUs
Component 2. Catalyzing Investments and Promoting Private Sector Participation
Tourism facilities/sites/public parks rehabilitated or constructed (Number)
                                       This indicator tracks the number of tourism facilities or public spaces that have been rehabilitated or newly
Description                            constructed as part of project activities, with an aim to attract tourists or provide basic services to tourists,
                                       such as visitor centers or night market, or other tourism-related amenities.
Frequency                              Semi-Annual
Data source                            Progress reports prepared by PMU
Methodology for Data Collection        Progress reporting by PMU
Responsibility for Data Collection     PMU & PIUs
On-shore fisheries related facilities upgraded (Number)
                                       This indicator tracks the number of onshore facilities for fisheries that have been rehabilitated or newly
                                       constructed as part of project activities. This includes climate- and disaster-resilient improvements or new
                                       developments to infrastructure such as cold storage, processing centers, or other fishery-related facilities.
Description
                                       Rehabilitation will prioritize improvements in energy efficiency, and all newly constructed buildings will
                                       adhere to energy efficiency standards. Where feasible, facilities will incorporate universal accessibility and
                                       inclusive design features to ensure access for persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups.
Frequency                              Semi-Annual
Data source                            Progress reports prepared by PMU
Methodology for Data Collection        Progress reporting by PMU
Responsibility for Data Collection     PMU & PIUs
New enterprises established or existing enterprises with expanded operations (Number, disaggregated by women-owned/women-led)
                                       This indicator measures the total number of newly established or expanded tourism-related, women-
                                       owned or women-led enterprises operating within the project area during the reporting period that
Description                            demonstrate business growth—defined as either (i) the generation of new revenue for newly established
                                       enterprises or at least a 5 percent increase in revenue for expanded enterprises, (ii) an increase of at
                                       least 1 additional employees, and (iii) at least one new product/service offering introduced.
Frequency                              Semi-annual
Data source                            Progress reports prepared by PMU
Methodology for Data Collection        M&E survey
Responsibility for Data Collection     PMU & PIUs
Beneficiaries satisfied with project interventions (residents, businesses, tourists, disaggregated by gender) (Percentage)
Description                            The percentage of direct and indirect beneficiaries including residents, local businesses, fishermen, and




                                                                                                                                                 Page 30
           The World Bank
           Sri Lanka Regional Empowerment through Vibrant, Inclusive, and Viable Economies (P511605)


                                     tourists who report being satisfied with project-supported interventions in the clusters. Satisfaction refers
                                     to beneficiaries’ positive assessment of improvements in infrastructure, services, facilities, and overall
                                     experience resulting from the project. This is a citizen-engagement-related indicator.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          Beneficiary feedback survey
Methodology for Data Collection      M&E surveys
Responsibility for Data Collection   PMU & PIUs
Private Capital Enabled by designing market-validated PPP projects (USD) (PCE-monetary indicator)
                                     The amount of private capital enabled by the market-validated PPP projects in the selected clusters will be
                                     measured. The market-validated PPP projects benefit from assessments, designs, and preparatory support
Description
                                     through the project and have finalized the commercial agreements between the public and private sectors,
                                     allowing them to move forward with implementation of the PPP.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          Progress reports prepared by PMU
Methodology for Data Collection      Progress reporting by PMU
Responsibility for Data Collection   PMU & PIUs
Women reporting increased perception of safety and accessibility in public spaces (Percentage)
                                     The percentage increase in the number of women who report improved perception of safety, comfort,
                                     and accessibility in the public spaces, facilities, and roads supported under the project that comply with a
                                     set of minimum women-friendly and accessibility and safety standards. These standards can include
                                     infrastructure and service features that enable women’s safe, comfortable, and inclusive access and use of
Description
                                     public spaces—such as adequate lighting, clear signage, gender-segregated sanitation facilities, safe
                                     transit connections, universal access features, and functional emergency response mechanisms. The
                                     baseline survey will assess existing safety and accessibility levels of public spaces and similar facilities to
                                     determine current compliance gaps.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          Progress reports prepared by PMU
Methodology for Data Collection      M&E survey
Responsibility for Data Collection   PMU & PIUs
Component 3. Program Management
Grievances received that are processed within the stipulated service standards (Percentage)
Description                          The percentage of grievances registered related to project activities is duly addressed.
Frequency                            Semi-annual
Data source                          Progress reports prepared by PMU
Methodology for Data Collection      Progress reporting by PMU
Responsibility for Data Collection   PMU & PIUs




                                                                                                                                             Page 31
