Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience Project, Phase II(P511492)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                 Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Jun-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01346




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience Project, Phase II(P511492)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)        Operation ID                Operation Name
Djibouti, Djibouti, Ethiopia,   P511492                     Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience Project,
Ethiopia, Horn of Africa,                                   Phase II
Kenya, Kenya, Somalia,
Somalia
Region                          Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH           26-Jan-2026                 16-Mar-2026                    Water
AFRICA
Financing Instrument            Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project              Ministry of Economy and     Ministry of Agriculture,
Financing (IPF)                 Finance                     Water, Fisheries, Livestock,
                                                            in charge of Halieutic
                                                            Ressources

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To increase the sustainable access and management of groundwater in rural Djibouti.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   To be decided
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             To be decided

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                             40.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                  40.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                    40.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing


                                                                                                                     Page 1



                                                                                                           Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience Project, Phase II(P511492)


      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                   40.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                                                 40.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                   Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                    The review did authorize the preparation to continue



 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1. Djibouti, though small in land area and population, holds significant strategic importance in the Horn of Africa.
   Geopolitically, Djibouti’s location at the crossroads of key maritime routes—particularly the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait, a
   chokepoint between the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden—has made it a vital platform for international trade and
   regional connectivity, particularly for landlocked neighbor, Ethiopia1, which relies heavily on Djibouti’s deep-water
   port. In addition to port services, Djibouti’s economy has evolved around logistics, telecommunications, and banking
   sectors that remain central to its development. Djibouti’s stability and strategic location near conflict zones have made
   it a key host for foreign military bases, boosting international security efforts and generating significant fiscal
   revenues. Additionally, Djibouti has emerged as a place of refuge for displaced populations from neighboring states,
   such as Somalia, Ethiopia, and Yemen, reinforcing its humanitarian significance in a volatile region.

2. In the last two decades, Djibouti saw steady economic growth, attaining lower-middle-income status with a per
   capita GDP of over US$3,200. Driven by its port services, logistics, and infrastructure development, Djibouti has
   attracted considerable investment and experienced a steady GDP growth rate averaging 4.4 percent annually from
   2000 to 2021. Key drivers of this growth include strategic infrastructure investments, Djibouti's advantageous geo-
   strategic location, and a stable macroeconomic framework. These strengths have attracted substantial foreign direct
   investment, amounting to US$2.3 billion between 2000 and 20202.

3. Despite the economic progress, Djibouti faces persistent challenges of poverty and inequality. As of 2017, 21 percent
   of households lived below the national poverty line, and 44 percent fell below the international lower-middle-income
   threshold3. Inequality in Djibouti is one of the highest in the MNA region with a Gini index of 41.6 in 20174. In 2023,
   the country ranked 175 out of 193 countries and territories in the Human Development Index (HDI). The



1 World Bank (2023). Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia - Horn of Africa Initiative: Regional Economic Corridor Project
2 The World Bank (2024). Djibouti Country Economic Memorandum.
3 World Bank (2024). Country Climate and Development Report: Republic of Djibouti.
4 World Bank (2022). Poverty & Equity Brief Djibouti. https://databankfiles.worldbank.org/public/ddpext_download/poverty/987B9C90-CB9F-

4D93-AE8C-750588BF00QA/previous/Global_POVEQ_DJI.pdf

                                                                                                                                          Page 2



                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience Project, Phase II(P511492)


    unemployment rate—particularly among youth, women, and those outside the capital—is more than three times the
    MENA average.

4. The rural-urban divide in Djibouti critically impacts social welfare and economic development. Policies must address
   rural needs and enhance infrastructure for inclusive growth. Due to the country's economic and infrastructural
   development centered around the capital, 79% of the population are residing in urban areas, primarily in Djibouti City.
   In contrast, only 21% of the population5 lives in rural areas which face significant challenges such as higher poverty
   rates and limited access to essential services like education and healthcare. Rural livelihoods, mainly agriculture and
   pastoralism, are increasingly threatened by environmental factors like droughts, further increasing rural-urban
   disparity and prompting migration to urban areas.


 Sectoral and Institutional Context

5. Djibouti faces critical water challenges from both scarcity and flooding, affecting development, job opportunities,
   food security, and livelihoods. With an arid climate and average annual rainfall of just 225 mm, the country has
   extremely limited renewable water resources—only 185 cubic meters per person per year, far below the 500 cubic
   meter absolute scarcity threshold. Recurrent droughts, such as those from 2008–2011 and 2021–2022, have severely
   impacted over 100,000 people, halved livestock herds, and caused GDP losses of up to 4% annually6. At the same time,
   flooding is becoming more frequent, with four major events in Djibouti City over the past two decades affecting up to
   200,000 residents and causing up to $47 million or 1.1% of GDP in a single event in 2023. Climate change will further
   increase these risks, as described in detail in the Country Climate and Development Report for Djibouti (2024). The
   application of the Bank’s Climate and Disaster Risk Screening Tool (Water Rapid Screening Assessment) corroborated
   these findings.

6. Access to drinking water has long been a major challenge for Djibouti given its unfavourable climatic conditions.
   The rate of access to safe drinking water remains weak with only 47 percent of the population in rural areas having
   access to basic drinking water compared to 83 percent in urban areas7. Djibouti has made important investments in
   urban water supply by establishing desalinization capacity and a pipeline connection to deliver water from Ethiopia8
   that together provide half of water supply and could deliver more at full capacity. However, the rural water supply
   situation in Djibouti remains very challenging. Limited water supply affects daily life, with communities often relying
   on distant or unreliable sources, leading to increased workloads, particularly for women and children who are typically
   responsible for water collection. Insufficient water supply hinders agricultural and livestock productivity, threatening
   the livelihoods of pastoralists and farmers.

7. Groundwater is Djibouti’s sole water resource and remains the primary source in rural areas. However, it is
   increasingly overexploited, and its quality is deteriorating. Years of extraction at rates far exceeding those in
   neighboring countries have led to serious depletion. Djibouti is abstracting annually 133% of its renewable
   groundwater, compared to 7% in Ethiopia and 18% in Kenya9. The quality of groundwater is also deteriorating; salinity
   levels are high: in 2005, more than half of the country’s boreholes recorded salinity above 900 milligrams per liter

5 World Bank staff estimates based on the United Nations Population Division's World Urbanization Prospects, retrieved from

https://data.worldbank.org/indicator
6 The 2021-2022 drought led to substantial food insecurity, affecting 37.1% of rural households and 9.7% of urban households. World Bank. 2024.

Djibouti - Climate and Health Vulnerability Assessment.
7 Djibouti CPF FY22-FY26
8 Djibouti imports about 30 percent of its water from Ethiopia
9 World Bank (2024). Country Climate and Development Report: Republic of Djibouti.



                                                                                                                                            Page 3



                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience Project, Phase II(P511492)


    (mg/L), with some reaching up to 1,200 mg/L10. Many rural communities rely on shallow local aquifers, which are
    recharged by rainfall and highly vulnerable to drought. During the severe drought from 2008 to 2011, nearly all
    traditional shallow wells and 80 percent of community wells across the country were either temporarily or
    permanently out of service.

8. Djibouti’s water security is closely tied to its regional relationships, particularly with Ethiopia, due to the
   transboundary nature of key water resources, especially groundwater. Djibouti shares important groundwater
   resources with its neighbors. The Afar Rift Valley /Afar Triangle Aquifer—one of only two major aquifers in Djibouti—
   extends across the borders of Ethiopia and Eritrea, making shared management essential. In recent years, regional
   cooperation has expanded with the development of a cross-border pipeline that currently supplies Djibouti with six
   million cubic meters of water annually—roughly one-quarter of urban water use. This pipeline has significantly
   boosted Djibouti’s water supply and strengthened hydrological and economic ties between the two countries. While
   the pipeline has additional unused capacity, its long-term reliability will partly depend on climate conditions in
   Ethiopia. Ensuring long-term water security will require cooperation and integrated management of these
   transboundary resources.

9. Djibouti's water management is fragmented and constrained by limited capacity. This hinders effective oversight
   and research on groundwater resources. The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and the Sea (Ministère de
   l’Agriculture, de l’Eau, de la Pêche, de l’Élevage et des Ressources Halieutiques, MAEP-RH) serves as the lead agency
   responsible for water resource studies and development. The National Water Board of Djibouti (Office National de
   l’Eau et de l’Assainissement de Djibouti - ONEAD) manages urban water supply infrastructure under MAEP-RH's
   supervision, while the National Water Resources Council (NECC) coordinates and plans national water. Additionally,
   the Centre for Research and Studies of Djibouti (Centre d'Études et de Recherche de Djibouti - CERD) is tasked with
   scientific research related to drinking water management and the search for new water sources.

10. The Direction de l’Hydraulique Rurale (Rural Hydraulic Directorate) of the MAEP-RH is responsible for rural water
    supply and groundwater management. Despite its importance, the Directorate struggles with significant resources
    and capacity constraints, limiting its ability to realize comprehensive studies, exploration, and drilling activities. It is
    responsible for planning and executing rural water supply projects, which involves developing and maintaining
    infrastructure, ensuring the provision of potable water, and supporting irrigation efforts. Additionally, the Directorate
    oversees the operation and maintenance of these rural water systems. The Directorate struggles to fulfill its roles
    effectively. Reasons are lack of sufficient data and information on aquifers, insufficient staffing and enforcement
    capabilities, along with coordination challenges among various entities involved in water management, including
    many NGOs and development partners. With rural water being free of charge, the Directorate is fully dependent on
    budget transfers.

11. The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) plays a crucial role in fostering regional cooperation and
    development in Eastern Africa. Established in 1986, IGAD focuses on peace, security, and economic development
    among its member states. In the sectoral context, IGAD enhances agricultural productivity and addresses climate
    change challenges through regional initiatives. As one of the Implementing Agency of Phase I of the Program, IGAD
    plays a crucial role in enhancing regional collaboration and capacity for groundwater management. IGAD's Water Unit
    directs regional activities, such as assessing transboundary aquifers. It is working closely with Project Implementation
    Units in participating member states to prioritize, define, and validate regional initiatives. The IGAD-Platform for
    Groundwater Collaboration (I-PGWC) helps member states prioritize actions for groundwater knowledge, information

10 Water is considered to become significantly unpalatable at levels greater than 1,000 mg/l) (WHO 2022a   )

                                                                                                                           Page 4



                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience Project, Phase II(P511492)


    sharing, capacity building, and policy harmonization. The Groundwater Information System (GWIS) allows countries
    to generate and share data on transboundary aquifers, adding value to inform decision-making and joint planning.
    IGAD’s coordination ensures consistency, fosters trust, and supports institutional capacity across member states for
    long-term groundwater management. By facilitating cross-country dialogue on groundwater use, particularly in areas
    with planned investments, IGAD ensures collaborative management of shared resources, thereby enhancing the
    region's ability to manage groundwater resources effectively and fostering resilience and sustainable development.


 Relationship to CPF

12. The proposed Project is closely aligned with the World Bank Group (WBG) Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
    2022-2025 for Djibouti. The Project reflects the WBG’s commitment to supporting Djibouti in reducing poverty,
    promoting inclusion, and advancing human capital development. It will contribute to the CPF’s focus on supporting
    government and public institutions’ efforts to strengthen basic service delivery and social inclusion. Additionally, the
    Project targets vulnerable populations, including rural communities, women, and girls, ensuring equitable access to
    essential services and opportunities. The Project also contributes to the implementation of the World Bank Group’s
    Middle East and North Africa Climate Roadmap (2021-2025). It is part of the CMU’s Engagement Area on Rural
    Resilience and will directly contribute to the scorecard indicators number of people provided with water, sanitation,
    and hygiene services, and number of people with enhanced resilience to climate risks. These indicators will also inform
    the development of the Project’s framework.

13. The Project is also aligned with the Government’s Vision 2035. This government- long-term strategy to build the
    country’s future is based on five core pillars: (i) Peace and national unity: Strengthening unity, peace and solidarity;
    (ii) Good governance: Reinforcing good governance and democracy; (iii) A diversified economy: Promoting competitive
    and healthy economic growth; (iv) Investing in human capital: Building a hardworking, healthy and educated
    workforce; and (v) Regional integration: Increasing trade and commerce with regional partners. The Project will
    contribute to all its pillars and in particular the pillars (ii), (iv) and (v).
 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To increase the sustainable access and management of groundwater in the Horn of Africa's borderlands.


  Key Results (From PCN)
14. Key results include better access to water supply for human consumption and improved resilience to droughts for
    rural communities. The Projects will enhance Djibouti’s knowledge on their groundwater resources and provide
    valuable information and tools for planning and implementation of groundwater management projects. At the
    national level, the Project will result in increased capacities for water and groundwater management, as well as for
    transboundary cooperation in the management of shared water resources,

 D. Concept Description
       The proposed Project aims to improve groundwater management at local, national, and regional scale, improve
       rural water supply and enhance rural livelihoods. Aligned with the HoAG4R Program, the Project has two main
       components: the first supports groundwater use through infrastructure and community-led initiatives; the
       second strengthens national and regional capacities for water management and coordination.



                                                                                                                        Page 5



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience Project, Phase II(P511492)


15. Component 1. Develop innovative groundwater-based infrastructure for resilient livelihoods. This component aims
    to finance resilient rural and small-town groundwater and water harvesting infrastructures and support the
    development of resilient livelihoods through the implementation of community-based inclusive groundwater
    management models and income generating activities. This component will include the following subcomponents:
        • Subcomponent 1.a: Supporting groundwater infrastructure development. This subcomponent will finance
            infrastructure solutions specifically designed to meet local needs, including the construction of new
            boreholes, the construction of surface water harvesting systems, and the piloting of solar desalination units
            for brackish groundwater. Comprehensive studies to be conducted under component 2 will inform the site
            selection and detailed planning of these activities. In developing groundwater infrastructure, we will leverage
            important insights and lessons learned from Phase I, where a thorough assessment of typical borehole failures
            was conducted. This includes using a resilient design checklist and salinity guidelines, to inform the selection
            and guide design of interventions and financing a design and supervision to ensure the proper use of these
            instruments.
        • Subcomponent 1.b: Support O&M of the financed schemes for long term sustainability. Community
            engagement is vital for operation but often cannot guarantee the adequate maintenance of the rural water
            systems. Phase I showed greater success with private sector involvement. This subcomponent will develop
            O&M models based on agreements between communities and private operators. Local governments will
            closely monitor O&M performance using standardized protocols.
        • Subcomponent 1.c: Promote local economic development. This subcomponent will invest in economic
            development and livelihoods enhancement, particularly for women. The Project will support income-
            generating activities, such as (a) developing date palm perimeters and production to combat malnutrition
            and supply the national market, (b) investing in livestock production (caprine and ovine) to combat
            malnutrition and supply the regional market; and (c) creating small jobs for maintenance and repairs to ensure
            the functionality of past investments, fostering a market for small repair craftsmen.


16. Component 2. Build the national institutional capacity and water resources information base for sustainable and
    inclusive groundwater management. This component is designed to enhance Djibouti's ability to explore, manage,
    and plan its water resources, while also broadening the nation's knowledge base in this area. It will build capacities
    for the integrated use of surface and groundwater resources, providing valuable insights and support for infrastructure
    development and management activities outlined in Component 1. The activities are structured into two
    subcomponents:

        •   Sub-component 2.a: Building institutional capacity on water resources exploration, management and
            planning. This includes developing a comprehensive Water Master Plan (2025-2040), financing equipment and
            infrastructure of the Rural Hydraulic Directorate, implementing a targeted capacity-building program and
            promoting transboundary cooperation.
        •   Sub-component 2b: Strengthening Djibouti’s water resources knowledge base. This subcomponent will
            finance detailed studies to improve the understanding and characterization of the transboundary Afar Rift
            Aquifer and the groundwater resources of Somalia Borderlands. Further the potential for surface water
            harvesting of the Tadjoura Region and Somalia Borderland will be assessed. The sub-component also will
            support the development of a national groundwater monitoring network and information management
            system. For the assessment of the transboundary water resources, active engagement of IGAD is required.

17. Component 3. Project Management, M&E, Knowledge Management, and Learning. This component will
    complement the other components by financing the operational costs of the Project Management Unit within the

                                                                                                                        Page 6



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience Project, Phase II(P511492)


   Ministry of Agriculture, as well as project coordination, fiduciary, environmental and social risk management,
   monitoring and evaluation and reporting. The component would also be responsible for knowledge management and
   learning, and evidence-based policy input




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                                    Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                        Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                  No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
  Chris Fischer
  Senior Water Specialist

  Safaa Bahije
  Water Resources Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Economy and Finance
  Ali Gadileh
  Director
  aligadileh@yahoo.fr

 Implementing Agencies
  Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries, Livestock, in charge of Halieutic Ressources
  Ibrahim Elmi
  General Secretary
  ibrahimelmimed@gmail.com

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT



                                                                                                              Page 7



                                                                                                      Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience Project, Phase II(P511492)


The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Chris Fischer, Safaa Bahije

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Michael Haney                        05-Jun-2025

Country Director:                        Stephane Guimbert                    29-Jun-2025




                                                                                                    Page 8



                                                                                            Official Use Only
