Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01495




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                        Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                                                                                      Irrigation Water Security,
                                                         MID EAST,NORTH
                          Tunisia                                                      P511719                        Resilience and Value-
                                                         AFRICA,AFG,PAK
                                                                                                                      Addition Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         02-Feb-2026                   31-Mar-2026                    Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Ministère de l’Agriculture,
                          Ministry of Economy and        des Ressources
                          Planning                       Hydrauliques et de la




_For Official Use Only_
                                                         Pêche, MARHP

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          To improve the quality of irrigation water services; to strengthen the operational performance of the irrigation
                          operators; and to increase crops' yields.

                          Components
                          1 - Operational performance and governance of the irrigation operators
                          2 - Modernization of public irrigation schemes
                          3 - Enhancing agricultural production and value
                          4 - Project management

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                             148.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                                  148.00



                                                                                                                                                Page 1



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                    124.00
                             Financing Gap                                                                                                      0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                  124.00
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                               Counterpart Funding                                                                                             24.00
                                 National Government                                                                                           24.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification




_For Official Use Only_
                          Substantial


                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context

                          1.        Tunisia is a lower middle-income country with a diverse economy driven by a large service sector but
                          experiencing moderate growth, fiscal challenges, regional disparities and high unemployment. Tunisia’s economy
                          stagnated in 2023, due to limited demand, drought, pressure on external financing conditions, and regulatory constraints;
                          but it slightly recovered in 2024 (1.6 percent growth); and then picked up in the first nine months of 2025 (2.4 percent
                          growth), driven by a recovery in the agricultural sector and increased construction activity. Assuming drought conditions
                          ease, it is expected that moderate growth will occur over 2026–27 but remains at substantial risk. Transfers to State-
                          Owned Enterprises (SOEs), together with public sector employment, social protection programs and other public
                          expenditures, contributed to a rising debt burden from 40 percent (2010) to 80 percent (2023) of GDP. The debt of the 50
                          largest SOEs constitutes 38 percent of the GDP (2020). Inequality has recently increased for the first time in decades: the
                          Gini Index rose from 32.8 (2015) to 33.7 (2021). Disparities persist between lagged interior regions and developed coastal
                          regions. Women's labor force participation in Tunisia is less than half that of men (26 percent versus 69 percent). Graduate
                          unemployment is 31 percent, reflecting persistent challenges in youth inclusion.

                          2.     Government’s priorities for the next five years are being formalized through the 2026-2030 National
                          Development Plan under preparation Enhancing human capital remains critical, with a focus on employability. Other

                                                                                                                                                  Page 2



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                          priorities include addressing water scarcity, advancing the energy transition, expanding digitalization, improving the
                          business environment, and supporting private sector development.

                          3.      The Tunisian economy is highly vulnerable to water scarcity, which is increasingly exacerbated by climate
                          change. Most climate change projections predict higher temperatures (1.9-2.9°C increase this century) and lower
                          precipitation (10-35 percent decrease) for the Mediterranean region, including Tunisia. The agricultural sector would be
                          particularly affected by climate inaction, with its value added expected to fall by 29 percent by 2050 (compared to 7 and
                          3 percent for industry and services, respectively), with dire implications for food security and rural jobs.

                           Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          4.       Tunisia successfully developed its water supply to the benefit of its population and economy, but the traditional
                          supply-oriented approach is increasingly constrained with respect to conventional water resources. The 1970s and
                          1980s marked the peak in the construction of large hydraulic infrastructure: dams were built in the water endowed
                          northwest, as well as significant inter-basin transfers linking these dams to the drier areas in the northeast (Tunis and Cap
                          Bon) and the center (Sfax). The country achieved near universal access to drinking water, and the provision of some form
                          of sanitation for 97 percent of the population. Irrigated agriculture – covering 10 percent of the agricultural land –
                          generates 36 percent of the agriculture value added. Surface water is mobilized to almost full capacity (92 percent), leaving




_For Official Use Only_
                          little opportunity for further supply-side augmentation through construction of new dams. Groundwater is overexploited
                          (133 percent), contributing to saltwater intrusion and increased abstraction costs. To increase its water availability, Tunisia
                          has been investing in non-conventional sources, although their contribution to the water balance didn’t reach yet that of
                          other North African countries: at present desalination and reuse of treated wastewater (TWW) contribute 2 percent and
                          1 percent, respectively, to the total water supply of Tunisia.

                          5.        Tunisia’s growing water gap is a major challenge for the country's socio-economic development: without action
                          to address water insecurity, a quarter of the country’s water demand could go unmet by 2050. Tunisia is extremely
                          water-scarce: per capita water availability in 2021 was 395 m3, below the conventional definition of the absolute water
                          scarcity threshold of 500 m3. With rapidly depleting resource endowment and sustained growth of demand across all
                          sectors, service interruptions are common, particularly in the more water-stressed Central and Southern regions. Tunisia
                          urgently needs implementation of both demand side and supply side management actions to close the gap, and to manage
                          the mismatch between supply and demand in a coherent and structural manner, rather than on a reactive emergency
                          basis. Currently, when water supply is insufficient, water from the dams is prioritized for human and industrial demands,
                          while restrictions are imposed on public irrigation schemes with far-reaching consequences for agricultural production.
                          Inter-basin transfers are key to managing the imbalance, but they are also expensive to construct and operate. The
                          exceptionally limited water supply of 2024 caused the energy costs of the Northern Water Canal and Pipeline Exploitation
                          Company (Société d’Exploitation des Canaux et Conduites d’Eau du Nord, SECADENORD) to double. Despite the
                          prioritization of potable water supply needs and severe restrictions applied to public irrigation schemes, the national water
                          utility (Société Nationale d’Exploitation et de Distribution des Eaux, SONEDE) does not receive sufficient freshwater to
                          meet domestic water needs. In response, SONEDE has started developing seawater desalination capacity (exploring
                          opportunities to do so through public-private partnerships, PPP), while gearing up efforts to reduce physical water losses
                          and to reduce per capita consumption (currently at 128 liters per day).

                          6.      Climate change further threatens Tunisia’s water endowment. Tunisia is among the countries most vulnerable
                          to climate change in Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan and Pakistan (MENAAP) region. Since 2015, the country has
                          been grappling with a multiyear drought, which has resulted in dam filling levels significantly below historical averages
                          and in reduced recharge of aquifers. Temperature increases lead to increases in water demand and evapotranspiration,

                                                                                                                                                    Page 3



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                          which intensifies water needs for agriculture. With decreasing availability of surface water sources, compounded by rising
                          temperatures, water users shift increasingly towards groundwater, adding to the pressure on already overexploited
                          groundwater resources. In addition, reduced water availability has adversely affected water quality, complicating efforts
                          to maintain safe and reliable supply standards for both urban consumption and agricultural use. Across multiple climate
                          change scenarios, it is projected that by 2050, increases in temperature and in the frequency of dry years, coupled with
                          changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events (including both floods and droughts), will further
                          decrease water availability. Moreover, climate change is leading to sea level rise in coastal Tunisia, which exacerbates
                          saltwater intrusion into aquifers, and higher temperatures could exacerbate wildfire risk.

                          7.       Demand for water has been substantially increasing. Tunisia’s population has increased threefold since 1950,
                          and has progressively moved to the cities, today, only one out of three Tunisian lives in rural areas. Irrigated areas tripled
                          since the early 1970s, thanks to the construction of large dams in the northwest (where most of the public irrigation
                          schemes are located) as well as increasing groundwater exploitation. Consequently, annual freshwater withdrawals have
                          increased from 1.1 billion m3 (1975) to 3.9 billion m3 (2021). Increasing water consumption generates greater volumes of
                          wastewater, intensifying the demand for the management of water quality, adequate sanitation and treatment
                          infrastructures: TWW volume increased from 5 million m3 in 1975 to 287 million m3 in 2020. These dynamics highlight the
                          necessity of IWRM to safeguard livelihoods, public health, and environmental sustainability.




_For Official Use Only_
                          8.        Tunisia’s water management challenges are not only about scarcity but also about efficiency and governance.
                          About 23 percent of drinking water and 30 percent of irrigation water in public schemes do not reach consumers due to
                          leakages, undermining both the efficient use of scarce resources and the revenues of the operators. In southern Tunisia,
                          lower services are more pronounced, with the quality of supplied water often exceeding the recommended maximum
                          salinity levels due to limitations in treatment capacity of brackish water sources. In the country's Southern region, only 7
                          percent of the population is satisfied with the quality of potable water supplied. While substantial investments have been
                          made in efficient on farm irrigation, rationalizing agricultural water consumption has been constrained by the limited
                          rollout of complementary governance measures (quotas, volumetric pricing, and incentives). Across all sub-sectors, the
                          cost of water in Tunisia does not fully reflect the scarcity of this resource.

                          9.       The sector’s performance is challenged by aging infrastructure, suboptimal maintenance, and insufficient
                          human resources. For SONEDE, non-revenue water (NRW) is now twice the level of two decades ago. ONAS's performance
                          is increasingly constrained by aging infrastructure, with many wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) operating beyond
                          capacity and requiring rehabilitation. Public irrigation schemes face ongoing challenges related to achieving higher value
                          addition, which in turn impacts cost recovery, maintenance levels, and service reliability, resulting in operational
                          disruptions. Staffing efficiency in SONEDE is high by international standards, with about two staff per 1,000 connections,
                          but this may likely reflect restrictions of labor legislation and a hiring freeze rather than operational efficiency. SONEDE’s
                          efficiency is constrained by the centralization of its operational functions and complex internal processes to execute
                          routine operational activities. Human resources are often strained, such the operation of desalination plants, for which
                          the local market of experienced specialists is thin. In ONAS, limited financial resources, as well as institutional and human
                          capacity undermine ONAS's ability to properly staff, monitor, and upgrade facilities. ONAS’ dire financial position is at the
                          heart of the hiring freeze that has been in place since 2008, with consequent adverse impact on expertise in the sub-
                          sector. These factors combined result in service gaps and environmental risks. The CRDAs are equally understaffed and
                          underfunded.

                          10.     Water management practices in Tunisia struggle to optimize economic returns, particularly within the
                          agricultural sector. About 8 percent of cultivated land is irrigated, contributing up to 35 percent of agricultural production
                          and 25 percent of agricultural exports. Yet, Tunisia records lower agricultural water productivity at the regional level.

                                                                                                                                                    Page 4



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                          Despite the proven benefits of climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices, uptake among smallholder farmers remains
                          limited, due to limited access to finance and extension services, limited availability and high cost of certified seeds, and
                          low awareness of innovative techniques. Despite successive plans and strategies prioritizing value chain development,
                          returns remain suboptimal: citrus fruits are still mostly exported in bulk, and 75 percent of tomato production is used as
                          low value input in the industry of concentrated tomato paste instead of exported as fresh tomatoes. This is largely related
                          to fragmented production systems, limited modalities to promote aggregation and limited farmer organizations unable to
                          effectively manage storage, processing and commercialization of their members’ production.

                          11.      The Tunisian water sector consists of a multiplicity of institutions that contribute to insufficient interministerial
                          coordination and suboptimal responses to water scarcity. The Ministry of Agriculture, Hydraulic Resources, and Fisheries
                          (Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Hydrauliques et de la Pêche, MARHP) oversees urban potable water through
                          the SONEDE; rural potable water and irrigated agriculture through its regional offices (Commissariats Régionaux de
                          Développement Agricole, CRDAs); as well as cross-cutting aspects of water resources management through its planning
                          department (Bureau de la Planification et des Equilibres Hydrauliques, BPEH), its hydraulic department (Direction Generale
                          des Barrages et des Grands Travaux Hydrauliques), and its water resources department including groundwater (Direction
                          Generale des Ressources en Eau, DGRE). The State Secretary for water resources reports to the MARHP Minister. The
                          Ministry of Environment oversees urban sanitation through the ONAS including all aspects of water quality management
                          including environmental and discharge regulations. Local groups (Groupement de Developpement Agricole, GDA) play a
                          role in rural areas for both water supply and last mile irrigation service delivery. Water sector institutions suffer from




_For Official Use Only_
                          delays in decision-making and are hindered by complex administrative procedures. In the case of TWW reuse, a multi-
                          sectoral steering committee was established under the leadership of MARHP. Coordination between ONAS, the Ministry
                          of Environment, Ministry of Health and MARHP remains limited, with improvement needed to better align investment
                          priorities for wastewater treatment and reuse.

                          12.      Modernizing the water sector’s legislative framework is key to more effectively addressing the growing water
                          gap. Efforts to modernize the institutional and legal framework in the water sector have not yet delivered significant
                          results. Tunisia’s Water Code dates to 1975, when the country was not suffering from water deficits. The revision of the
                          Water Code has been under discussion since 2009, but changes in key political positions and limited technical consensus
                          have been significantly delaying its approval. The IWRM agenda would benefit from improved leadership, and utilities are
                          being pressured to assume new roles (e.g., SONEDE as producer of desalinated water, ONAS as producer of TWW) that
                          are not aligned with their original mandates, competencies and/or financial structures, for which they have insufficient
                          human and financial resources. Attempts at introducing reforms to improve management of public irrigation schemes
                          illustrate the challenges of advancing complex institutional changes that involve multiple stakeholders and policy makers.
                          For TWW reuse, which has been identified as a priority, efforts to strengthen regulatory and institutional framework are
                          also challenged by the complexity of coordinating policies across multiple departments.

                          13.      Water utilities and public operators in Tunisia face increasingly strained budgets; despite this, their overall
                          financial positions remain relative resilient. The government’s approach to SOE governance challenges is to address
                          reform measures by sector with tailored interventions adapted to each public utility. For the water sector operators,
                          proposed measures include improving operational efficiency (e.g reduction in NRW), financial sustainability, addressing
                          institutional bottlenecks, and increasing private sector participation. Except for SONEDE, subsidies are needed to
                          compensate for the shortfall in revenues collected from customers, which are insufficient to cover Operation and
                          Maintenance (O&M) costs, let alone the capital investments for the renewal and expansion of infrastructure. Yet these
                          subsidies are not sufficient to help address pressure on service quality, aging infrastructure, and limited technical and
                          commercial performance. At the same time, utilities have limited power to increase their revenues, as pricing decisions



                                                                                                                                                    Page 5



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                          are taken at higher policy levels and shaped by social considerations. The challenge of financial sustainability in the sector
                          is further impacted by inflation.

                          14.      The Plan Eau 2050 (Water 2050 Plan) aims to close the water demand-supply gap by 2050. The Plan, which was
                          presented to the Higher Water Council in 2023, serves as a cornerstone for the country’s economic growth, human
                          development, and environmental sustainability. Presented to the Higher Water Council in 2023, the Plan Eau 2050
                          advocates for infrastructure development, institutional and governance improvements, legal reforms, and enhanced
                          interministerial coordination. Prioritization still needs to be sharpened, and several proposals have yet to gain broad
                          institutional ownership. The Plan aims to increase contribution of non-conventional water supply, increasing contribution
                          of TWW reuse to the water balance by 20 times, and of desalination by four times by 2050. In the face of its ambitious
                          targets, the Plan estimates a total financing need of US$23 billion, or US$900 million per year. This is well beyond the
                          financing capacity of the state budget, as it corresponds to 60 percent of total public annual investments.

                          15.      The RESEau Program aims to support the Government of Tunisia in the coordinated implementation of
                          investments, performance improvements and reforms needed to shift the country towards greater water security and
                          resilience. The Program adopts a holistic approach, focusing on key productive uses such as potable water, sanitation and
                          irrigation services coupled with broader water resources management interventions. Program interventions aim at making
                          services more resilient in the face of climate change; tackling both demand management and supply increase and
                          diversification; and spanning across conventional (surface and groundwater) and non-conventional (desalination and




_For Official Use Only_
                          TWW reuse) water sources. The RESEau Program complements ongoing efforts supported by the Bank through the
                          Integrated Disaster Resilience Program for Results (P173568) and by sector partners in improving water resources
                          management through improved monitoring, planning (systems modeling and decision-making tools and development of
                          early warning systems as well as development of water management strategies (e.g to improve groundwater
                          management). The programmatic approach recognizes the interconnected challenges across sub-sectors and the need for
                          a holistic approach to achieve impact and sustainability at scale. As part of the Program conceptualization process, the
                          World Bank (WB) prepared a Water sector note building on the Plan Eau 2050, which was socialized with several
                          concerned Ministries (Ministry of Economy and Planning, MEP; Ministry of Finance, MF; MARHP; Ministry of Environment)
                          and utilities (SONEDE, ONAS) in December 2024. The note identified key performance improvement actions and reforms
                          that are needed to accompany infrastructure development over the next ten years to ensure that the RESEau Program
                          achieves its anticipated benefits in a sustainable way.

                          Irrigated agriculture sub-sector

                          16.      Agriculture in Tunisia is highly vulnerable to water scarcity, which is increasingly exacerbated by climate change.
                          Agriculture is essential to the country’s food security, producing on average 50 percent of wheat, 65 percent of coarse
                          grains, 90 percent of red meat, and the entirety of fruits, vegetables, poultry and eggs. It contributes on average 10 percent
                          of the GDP and 14 percent of the jobs (50 percent in rural areas). The agricultural sector would be particularly affected by
                          climate inaction, with its value added projected to fall by 29 percent by 2050 (compared to 7 and 3 percent for industry
                          and services, respectively), with dire implications for the country’s food security and rural jobs.

                          17.     The arid climate of Tunisia makes irrigation essential to secure production and increase agricultural value
                          added. Only 10 percent of the agricultural land is irrigated, but it generates on average 36 percent of the agricultural GDP
                          and 25 percent of the agricultural exports. Public schemes represent half of the irrigated area in Tunisia. They are largely
                          concentrated in the northwest, across the four governorates of Beja, Bizerte, Jendouba and Siliana. Their construction
                          dates mostly to the ‘70s and ‘80s, in parallel to the development of the dams upstream: these large investments were a
                          national priority to ensure the development of the agricultural sector, to contribute to food security, exports and jobs.


                                                                                                                                                    Page 6



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)



                          18.       Agriculture is often cited as using 75 percent of Tunisia’s water resources; however, this has not been the case
                          over the past decade due to reduced water allocations and sub-optimal planning. In years with low water levels in the
                          dams, the allocation to irrigation is reduced. Restrictions prevent production of high value summer crops, while
                          safeguarding fruit trees and ensuring production of strategic crops (e.g. cereals, forages, sugar beet). As irrigated
                          agriculture comes last in the prioritization of water use, there is little visibility on the allocation of water throughout the
                          season, which reduces efforts to optimize use of available water resources for agriculture. Over the past five years, farmers
                          in public irrigation schemes were able to use only two-thirds of their allocations as a result of their being informed too
                          late into the agricultural season about water availability and thus not being able to use the full allocation. Farmers’ lack of
                          visibility on water allocation throughout the season is a powerful deterrent to agricultural intensification and investments
                          towards higher value production, affecting incomes, jobs, and food security, and ultimately driving groundwater
                          overexploitation.

                          19.      Farmers in public irrigation schemes face constraints in irrigation service delivery, meaning they are not able to
                          access water in time and in the quantity needed for their agricultural production. This is a powerful deterrent to
                          agricultural intensification and higher value production. Service challenges stem from aging infrastructure, often poorly
                          operated and maintained: at least 30 percent of the water does not reach the farmers due to leakages, and the system
                          faces frequent breakdowns. Water is provided on rotation to farmers, limiting crop diversification. Meters are often




_For Official Use Only_
                          broken, preventing volumetric charges. This negatively affects the operators’ financial performance and removes
                          incentives for farmers to use scarce water resources more productively. Another element influencing the quality of the
                          service is the mounting competition over water, due to higher demand combined with climate change: irrigated
                          agriculture is often cited as using 75 percent of Tunisia’s water resources, but in fact this has not been the case over the
                          past decade due to reduced water levels in the dams and consequent restrictions to irrigation, in favor to domestic,
                          industry and municipal uses. Not only is the allocation to irrigation reduced, but suboptimal water resource planning
                          results in farmers being informed about their water allocation well into the agricultural season, making it impossible for
                          them to use the water and resulting in water allocated to agriculture going unused.

                          20.      The Offices for Agricultural Development (Offices de Mise en Valeur, OMV) were established for the
                          management of public irrigation schemes as they were constructed. The OMV, under the direct purview of the
                          Presidency of the Republic, were public utilities, financially autonomous and operating on a commercial basis, with a
                          mandate focused on public irrigation schemes. Their financial status progressively deteriorated because they were
                          required to maintain financial balance without having control over tariff setting. As part of broader efforts to streamline
                          and consolidate public services, the CRDAs were established in 1989 as regional branches of MARHP, responsible for
                          agricultural development and valorization, extension service, and water resource management across rainfed and
                          irrigated agriculture. The OMVs were progressively dismantled, and the CRDAs took over the management of the public
                          irrigation schemes through their Hydraulic and Rural Equipment Department (Division de l’Hydraulique et de l’Équipement
                          Rural, DHER). However, the challenges of the sector were not resolved after the management was transferred from the
                          OMVs to the CRDAs, so much so that starting in 1999, the CRDAs progressively delegated part of the O&M responsibilities
                          in public irrigation schemes to the newly created GDAs, following a global trend towards participatory irrigation
                          management. Usually, the CRDAs retain the O&M for the production lines (large infrastructures like pumping stations,
                          reservoirs, and large diameter pipelines), while they delegate to the GDAs the water service (O&M of the distribution
                          network, client relationship, metering reading and payment collection).

                          21.      Over the past 25 years, the management of public irrigation schemes has generally demonstrated limited
                          performance. The CRDAs face significant challenges as public administrative bodies to deliver a commercial service: they
                          lack financial autonomy, they are stretched across a variety of services in irrigated and rainfed areas, and they have limited

                                                                                                                                                    Page 7



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                          staff. Similarly to the OMVs, the CRDAs keep struggling with scarce financial resources for irrigation, due to the constraints
                          imposed on them to implement tariff increase. Tariffs have been frozen since 2002. In 2021, a gradual tariff increase was
                          launched, but shortly after suspended due to the restrictions on water allocation for irrigation. As an additional challenge,
                          the CRDAs struggle to collect for the GDAs their share of the farmers’ payment. Overall, the CRDAs recover only 50 percent
                          of O&M costs.

                          22.     The delegation of the water service from the CRDAs to the GDAs is often a contributor to the modest
                          performance of public irrigation schemes. The GDAs are tasked by the CRDAs to provide the water service in 85 percent
                          of the public irrigation schemes in Tunisia. However, CRDA/GDA relationship is often blurry, with dilution of responsibilities
                          and lack of accountability towards the farmers. Less than half of the GDAs have a valid management contract with the
                          CRDAs. The GDAs have limited technical capacity, with only 25 percent employing a technical director. They are in principle
                          tasked with maintenance of the distribution networks, but they oftentimes resort to the CRDAs due to their lack of
                          technical competence and financial means. Most GDAs have accumulated significant debt with the CRDAs. They have
                          usually poor recovery rates, due to their lack of leverage and willingness to implement consequences for farmers not
                          paying their bills. Only 37 percent of the GDAs manage to cover half of the O&M costs. The GDAs often fail to fairly
                          represent farmers’ interests and facilitate communication, and indeed only 30 percent have an elected board.

                          23.      To overcome these challenges, the MARHP has been exploring the opportunity of transferring the management




_For Official Use Only_
                          responsibility of public irrigation schemes from the CRDAs to a utility in parallel to the modernization of the irrigation
                          infrastructure. A study conducted in 2017 as part of the PIAIT project preparation identified the opportunity of decoupling
                          the irrigation management function for public irrigation schemes from the CRDAs. It compared various options for the
                          management of the public irrigation schemes: (i) the public authority; (ii) the corporatized public company (State-Owned
                          Enterprise, SOE); (iii) the public-private company with a majority of public capital; (iv) the public-private company with a
                          majority of private capital; and (v) the farmer-based organization. The analysis indicated that the most suitable options
                          for the majority of public irrigation schemes in Tunisia is the public company, which could possibly open its capital to
                          private investors over time, once key conditions are met (proper technical and financial records available, reasonable level
                          of cost recovery). This autonomous, financially viable, client-oriented utility would progressively consolidate the
                          management of the public irrigation schemes across the northwest as they get rehabilitated. The study included extensive
                          consultations at all levels (farmers, GDAs, CRDAs, MARHP, MEP, MoF and other key stakeholders), which recorded a broad
                          consensus on the need to improve irrigation services.

                          24.      The reform towards the irrigation utility is proving slower than anticipated. Over the past seven years, the draft
                          decree for the creation of the utility has been submitted multiple times to the Interministerial Committee, each time
                          raising queries and requiring revisions. This is in part due to shifts in leadership within MARHP, and in part due to the
                          broader challenges of building consensus around the reform and the related fiscal implications with the need to combine
                          a progressive tariff increase with a temporary subsidy. The MARHP remains committed to the long-term institutional
                          evolution towards the irrigation utility, but it also recognized the need for intermediate actions, which can provide quick
                          wins in terms of service provision, safeguard the modernized infrastructure, and create a more enabling environment
                          fostering the long-term institutional shift.

                          25.    The MARHP conceptualized an incremental approach with “no regrets” actions, as the institutional framework
                          keeps evolving, with improvement of technical and commercial performance of the CRDAs achieved through a
                          combination of: (i) enhanced technical capacity of CRDAs’ staff to manage the modernized infrastructure; and (ii)
                          outsourcing of some of the O&M functions through service contracts with defined performance metrics.




                                                                                                                                                    Page 8



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                          26.      To enhance the CRDAs technical and commercial performance, a central monitoring unit in DGGREE/MARHP
                          was recently established to foster synergies, economy of scale, and data driven decision making in the management of
                          modernized public irrigation schemes. The CRDAs will fully retain their management responsibilities of the public
                          irrigation schemes, with the central unit offering support as needed. As the utility is created, the central unit could evolve
                          towards a regulatory role. The central monitoring unit would have the following core functions: (i) Forging synergies across
                          CRDAs for optimization of resources; (ii) Enhanced IT solutions; (iii) Coordinated M&E for data-driven decision making;
                          and (iv) :Supporting capacity development for improved management.

                          27.      To sustain agriculture’s role in food security, exports, and jobs, farmers in public irrigation schemes must be
                          enabled to optimize the use of limited water for production. This requires: (i) strengthened performance of irrigation
                          service operators; (ii) modernized irrigation infrastructure, reducing losses and ensuring more flexible access to water;
                          and (iii) improved agricultural value addition through enhanced productivity and market access, in line with the
                          AgriConnect vision. The Tunisia Irrigated Agriculture Intensification Project (Projet d'Intensification de l'Agriculture Irriguée
                          en Tunisie, PIAIT P160245), supported by the World Bank over 2018-2026 (closing on June 30, 2026), focuses on these
                          three pillars. The proposed Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project builds on these same pillars,
                          enhancing the approach based on the lessons learned from the PIAIT.

                          28.      The proposed project includes four components, for a total project cost of US$148 million. The IBRD loan will




_For Official Use Only_
                          total US$124 million, financing all the activities proposed net of taxes. The government contribution is estimated at US$24
                          million, covering all project related taxes and fees. The government will also contribute to the project financing in the
                          form of salaries for civil servants assigned to the project.

                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           29.    To improve the quality of irrigation water services; to strengthen the operational performance of the irrigation
                           operators; and to increase crops' yields.

                            Key Results

                          30. The PDO indicators are:
                          • People supplied with improved quality of water service (#);
                          • Reduction in non-revenue water (m3/yr), as an indicator of operator performance;
                          • Revenue collection efficiency (%), as an indicator of operator performance;
                          • Increase in yield of selected crops (%);
                          • Number of direct project beneficiaries (#).

                            D. Project Description

                          Component 1. Operational performance and governance of the irrigation operators (US$5 million, in addition to 1
                          million Government contribution)

                          31.   This component will strengthen the operational and governance framework for selected Public Irrigation
                          Schemes to improve service delivery and sustainability, through: (i) enhancing CRDAs and GDAs technical and commercial


                                                                                                                                                      Page 9



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                          capacity through training, technical assistance, exchange visits, equipment and vehicles; (ii) supporting the
                          operationalization of the central monitoring unit within DGGREE through training, technical assistance, exchange visits,
                          and equipment, to optimize resources, standardize technical designs, prepare technical guidelines and maintenance plans,
                          support CRDAs in the strategic outsourcing of some O&M functions, and inform the reform agenda towards an
                          autonomous irrigation utility; (iii) deploying digital solutions to optimize irrigation management by the CRDAs, through
                          the purchase and operationalization of GIS-enabled management systems, SCADA for automation, reduction in NRW
                          significantly lowering GHG emissions, and increased energy efficiency, M&E systems, Computerized Maintenance
                          Management System (CMMS) and payment systems, and digitalized documentation related to the modernized
                          infrastructure of the public irrigation schemes, and development of analytical budgeting at CRDA level; and (iv) enhancing
                          farmers’ capacity in water management at the farm level through training, technical assistance and exchange visits, to
                          enhance their understanding of the characteristics of the irrigation service, promote Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) and
                          climate resilience practices, laying the foundations for increased agriculture production and value (Component 3). The
                          implementation of this component will be led by the DGGREE.

                          32.      This component will support the “no regrets” actions defined by MARPH, as the institutional framework keeps
                          evolving. Performances will improve thanks to infrastructure modernization (Component 2) and enhanced technical and
                          commercial performance of the CRDAs. Regarding the outsourcing of some of the O&M functions to GDAs, the component
                          will support the drafting of updated management contract reflecting the new operational requirements of the modernized
                          infrastructure. In case of underperforming GDAs in the provision of the water service prior to the modernization of




_For Official Use Only_
                          irrigation schemes, they will no longer be involved in the provision of the water service once modernization is completed.
                          Under Component 3, the project will provide support to GDAs, which are interested in expanding their focus towards
                          other agricultural tasks. The project will support analytics needed to foster the long-term reform towards the creation of
                          the irrigation utility.

                          Component 2. Modernization of public irrigation schemes (US$95 million, in addition to 18 million Government
                          contribution)

                          33.      This component will improve the quality of irrigation and drainage services in public irrigation schemes, through
                          infrastructure modernization and enhanced O&M; and enhance the accessibility and connectivity to markets, through
                          rural roads rehabilitation, in the public irrigation schemes of BouHertma (Jendouba), Testour and MedjezElBab (Beja),
                          Mateur (Bizerte), and Gaafour and Laroussa (Siliana), through: (i) infrastructure modernization of irrigation and drainage
                          infrastructure, through renovation of pumping stations, reservoirs, main pipelines, distribution networks, drainage
                          systems, and installation of photovoltaic systems to reduce energy use and GHG emissions; (ii) strengthen market
                          connectivity through rehabilitation of selected rural roads; (iii) engineering and consulting services for design review,
                          contract management, technical audits, quality oversight, and related ESCP implementation; (iv) outsourcing of O&M
                          functions for selected infrastructure and irrigation service delivery, through service contracts with defined performance
                          metrics; and (v) preparing studies for modernization of public irrigation schemes for future financing. The implementation
                          of this component will be led by the DGGREE, with technical inputs from the CRDAs of Beja, Bizerte, Siliana and Jendouba.

                          34.      All schemes to be supported were also supported under the PIAIT (closing in June 2026). The BouHertma
                          irrigation scheme – of a total area of 24,000 ha - has been partially modernized under the PIAIT (9,600 ha for irrigation
                          infrastructure, 900 ha for drainage infrastructure), with the remaining 14,400 ha in need of modernization of its irrigation
                          and drainage infrastructure. Modernizing the remaining part of the scheme will not only improve irrigation performance
                          over that area but also facilitate the operability of the whole scheme. In addition, the project will include complementary
                          investments in the other public irrigation schemes modernized under the PIAIT.



                                                                                                                                                 Page 10



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                          35.      The irrigation scheme of BouHertma (Jendouba) has been prioritized based on the infrastructure rehabilitation
                          needs, the related poor water service performance, and the consequent vulnerability of agricultural production to climate
                          shocks. The economy of the Jendouba governorate is mainly based on agriculture and livestock farming, with agricultural
                          land accounting for 92 percent of the total area. The governorate contributes a significant share of the national production
                          of strategic food products with an average of 13 percent of cereal production, 26 percent of vegetables, 13 percent of
                          milk, 16 percent of potatoes and 9 percent of red meat. During the 2010–2011 Tunisian Revolution, Jendouba was a center
                          of unrest driven by concerns over unemployment and marginalization – issues that continue to shape perceptions today.
                          The BouHertma irrigation scheme is fed from the BouHertma dam on the BouHertma river. The dam was constructed in
                          1999 and raised in 2024, and serves both irrigation and potable water. The BouHertma river is a tributary of the Medjerda
                          river: the BouHertma dam is hence upstream of the Sidi Salem dam, which is the largest dam in the country, with the
                          double purpose of electricity production and irrigation. In recent years, the level in both dams has been considerably lower
                          than average, and BouHertma dam has been releasing some of its water to ensure continued energy production from the
                          Sidi Salem dam, with consequent reduction in allocation to the BouHertma irrigation scheme. In the future, it is expected
                          that the BouHertma scheme will be less prone to constrained water allocation due to the forthcoming completion of the
                          Malek2 and Barbara dams. The renovation of pumping stations and reservoirs by switching the PAP2 scheme of the
                          BouHertma system (9,368 ha of irrigated area) to variable speed pumps thereby lowering GHG emissions by 81 percent
                          from 16,086 tCO2e in the baseline scenario to 3,100.97 tCO2e in the project scenario; similarly, the renovation of main
                          pipeline, distribution networks and drainage systems, and photovoltaic systems, will allow to lower energy use and GHG
                          emissions.




_For Official Use Only_
                          36.      The project will also include the modernization of: (i) the main pipeline of the public irrigation scheme of Mateur;
                          and (ii) feeder and service roads to ensure adequate accessibility and market linkages (Component 3) to the irrigation
                          schemes of BouHertma, Testour and MedjezElBab, as well as Gaafour and Laroussa.

                          Component 3. Enhancing agricultural production and value (US$20 million, in addition to US$4 million Government
                          contribution)

                          37.      This component will enhance farmer productivity and market engagement, through: (1) providing technical
                          assistance to strengthen farmer capacities, support producer organizations, and facilitate the adoption of climate-smart
                          technologies and business management tools; (2) strengthening input systems and productive capacities by improving
                          access to affordable, climate-resilient seeds and fodder, upgrading seed laboratories in collaboration with selected
                          research centers, introducing mechanization tools and mobile laboratory technologies for optimizing feed and production
                          cost and providing targeted genetic support for livestock productivity; (3) enhancing market access and value addition
                          through upgrading quality control and certification infrastructure, supporting labeling and product differentiation,
                          increasing storage capacity, and promoting linkages between farmers, processors and markets; (4) promoting
                          digitalization, data and information access through the development of digital platforms for market intelligence,
                          traceability, monitoring, value chain coordination; and (5) expanding income opportunities by diversifying on-farm
                          activities and developing agrotourism circuits that showcasing local products, building on existing initiatives and
                          partnerships. The implementation of this component will be led by the DGPA, in collaboration with interprofessional
                          organizations (GIL, GIVLAIT, GIFruits, ONH, ONF) through Memoranda of Understanding.

                          38.    This component aims to ensure that the modernization of public irrigation schemes supported under the
                          proposed project as well as under the PIAIT translate into higher, more resilient, and market-oriented agricultural
                          production. Building on the World Bank’s AgriConnect approach, the component will support farmers enhancing their
                          productivity and market engagement by strengthening their access to markets (also thanks to rehabilitation of rural roads
                          under Component 2), finance in synergy with IFC AAAP, and digital tools including digital payment in synergy with IFC

                                                                                                                                                  Page 11



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                          AAAP, and by promoting the adoption of innovative technologies, climate-smart and business-oriented farming practices.
                          Through AgriConnect, the component will support a set of integrated interventions to enhance productivity,
                          competitiveness, sustainability, inclusiveness and job creation in farming systems in the targeted irrigation schemes.
                          Farmers will be supported along the entire value chain from research and development, innovations, input supply and
                          production to aggregation, processing, and marketing with particular attention to women and youth entrepreneurs and
                          climate-resilient production models. Higher incomes will enable farmers to pay for water service O&M costs, improving
                          the irrigation operator’s finances and reinforcing the sustainability of the improved irrigation service.

                          39.      Activities under this component will target the main agricultural value chains in the project area (cereals,
                          fodder, horticulture, potatoes, dairy and livestock, olive oil, and fruits) while promoting diversification through local
                          product value addition and agrotourism. Rather than supporting each value chain separately, interventions will focus on
                          cross-cutting enablers that drive the AgriConnect vision:
                          • Strengthening input systems and productive capacities by improving access to affordable, climate-resilient seeds and
                              fodder; supporting seed laboratories in collaboration with research center such as the Institution of Agricultural
                              Research and Higher Education (IRESA) for research and development, and dissemination of innovative technologies,
                              local seed multiplication groups; introducing mechanization tools and cutting-edge mobile laboratory technologies for
                              optimizing feed and production costs; and providing targeted genetic support for livestock productivity.
                          • Enhancing market access and value addition by upgrading quality control and certification infrastructure (e.g., olive




_For Official Use Only_
                              oil and fruit laboratories); supporting labeling and product differentiation (geographical indications, ISO standards,
                              AOC labels); promoting linkages between farmers, processors, and markets in synergy with IFC AAAP; and supporting
                              increased accessibility through rural roads rehabilitation (Component 2). Farmers’ organizations and interprofessional
                              groups will be key partners to strengthen aggregation and marketing.
                          • Promoting data, digitalization and information access through the development of digital platforms for market
                              intelligence, fodder traceability, olive oil observatory, and value chain coordination.
                          • Expanding income opportunities by diversifying on-farm activities and developing agrotourism circuits that showcase
                              local products.
                          • Providing tailored technical assistance to strengthen farmer capacities, support producer organizations, and facilitate
                              the adoption of climate-smart technologies and business management tools.

                          Component 4. Project Management (US$4 million, in addition to US$1 million Government contribution)

                          40.      This component will finance costs associated with Project coordination and management by DGGREE, DGPA
                          and CRDAs, through: (i) procurement of goods and equipment for implementing agencies at national and sub-national
                          levels; (ii) technical assistance and training for project management; (iii) monitoring and evaluation activities and
                          assessments; (iv) capacity building for implementation of environmental and social risk management; and (v) eligible
                          operational costs. The DGGREE and the DGPA will each be responsible for part of the implementation of this component,
                          which will support project coordination and management, monitoring and evaluation activities. The salaries of PIU staff
                          and the project audit will be paid by the Borrower.

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate




                                                                                                                                               Page 12



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                           Legal Operational Policies                                                               Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                              Yes
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                        No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          41.       Projects on International Waterways (OP7.50). Part of the project will be implemented in a transboundary basin,
                          the Medjerda basin shared with Algeria. However, the impact of the project on the transboundary basin will be negligible,
                          as all of the investment is in rehabilitation, without any irrigation expansion. It is expected that the project will not change
                          the volumes abstracted from Medjerda river or record efficiency gains achieved in rehabilitated schemes. A memo
                          requesting an exception to the notification requirement has been approved by the Bank’s Regional Vice President on
                          January 14, 2026.

                          E. Environmental and Social




_For Official Use Only_
                          42.       The project activities are expected to generate typical construction-related environmental risks such as noise,
                          dust, solid and liquid waste, increased runoff, and soil erosion. The use of heavy machinery, opening of borrow pits or
                          quarries, and potential removal of vegetation or trees may cause site degradation, landscape disturbance, or habitat
                          fragmentation. While these risks are largely predictable and site-specific, the spatial scale of the infrastructure
                          components and their proximity to sensitive areas (watercourses, forested patches, agricultural lands) require systematic
                          environmental screening and careful planning. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which will
                          guide environmental due diligence for all activities, was prepared by the client, disclosed by the MARHP on January 19,
                          2026. The ESMF includes screening criteria and environmental classification procedures, institutional roles and
                          responsibilities, and templates for site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The ESMF will
                          ensure that all activities comply with the World Bank Group’s Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines including
                          SEA/SH risk management, national legislation, and good international industry practice. It will also provide specific
                          guidance on pollution prevention and control, including measures to manage construction-related nuisances (dust, noise,
                          traffic), reduce water contamination, protect soil and vegetation, and ensure proper waste handling.

                          43.      Social risks for this project are deemed to be Substantial, particularly given the potential impacts of the project on
                          local communities, including temporary disruption to livelihoods, changes in land access, and the need to manage
                          expectations around project benefits, especially for vulnerable groups among farmers, women and youth. Social risks
                          include: (i) weak social risk management system; (ii) limited institutional capacity to manage social risks through the
                          Environmental and Social Framework (ESF); (iii) poor working conditions, lack of formal contracts, inadequate
                          occupational health and safety (OHS) measures, and the use of child or forced labor, especially among migrant or
                          seasonal workers; (iv) influx of labor, even if limited, can create social tensions with local communities and increase
                          the risk of sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH).

                          44.      To mitigate these risks, the following measures are being put in place:
                          (i) development of Labor Management Procedures (LMPs);
                          (ii) development of codes of Conduct, to be signed by all project workers, and regular trainings will be provided on
                               labor rights and SEA/SH prevention. The effectiveness of mitigation measures provided by the ESMF and
                               transferred to contractors through ESMPs including contractual obligations will depend on the capacity of local

                                                                                                                                                    Page 13



                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                                services providers for health and SEA/SH risks’ management, the availability of emergency resources, and the
                                extent to which communities are engaged in risk mitigation efforts. In some cases, the lack of adequate
                                infrastructure or health services in the project area can exacerbate these risks, underscoring the need for
                                integrated planning and coordination with local authorities including on SEA/SH risk management that will
                                require strengthening the services providers’ capacities.
                          (iii) Land Acquisition, Restriction to land use and forced eviction are also among the most sensitive social risks in
                                irrigation projects. In Tunisia, the legal and procedural framework for land acquisition is complex and often
                                results in delays in compensation and resettlement, particularly for vulnerable groups. Procedural gaps remain,
                                leading to the risk of exclusion from compensation, insufficient consultation, and lack of transparency. Physical
                                and economic displacement can disrupt livelihoods, especially for smallholder farmers and marginalized
                                communities. To mitigate these risks, site-specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be developed once the
                                risks are identified for a given project site, ensuring that compensation is fair, timely, and inclusive. The use of
                                escrow accounts for compensation payments will be critical for effective risk management. However, the success
                                of these measures will largely depend on the political will, administrative efficiency, and the ability to engage
                                affected communities in meaningful dialogue throughout the project lifecycle.
                          (iv) Cultural Heritage: Although the risk to cultural heritage is often considered low in irrigation projects, it remains
                                a concern, particularly where civil works may inadvertently affect sites of historical, archaeological, or cultural
                                significance. In Tunisia, the ESF requires that all projects include chance finds procedures in contracts, ensuring
                                that any discoveries of cultural heritage during construction are reported and managed in accordance with




_For Official Use Only_
                                national laws and international best practices. Projects are also expected to consult with local communities and
                                relevant authorities to identify and protect cultural heritage sites in advance of construction. While no major
                                incidents have been reported in recent projects, the risk remains, especially in areas with rich historical legacies
                                or where infrastructure development is taking place in previously undisturbed areas. The effectiveness of
                                mitigation measures will depend on the thoroughness of the ESMPs, the capacity of contractors to implement
                                chance finds procedures, and the involvement of national cultural heritage instate (INP), as needed.
                          (v) Difficulties for Stakeholder Engagement: Effective stakeholder engagement is critical for the success and
                                sustainability of irrigation projects, yet it is often hampered by exclusion of vulnerable groups, poor
                                dissemination of information, and weak grievance management systems. In Tunisia, projects have identified risks
                                of elite capture, social exclusion due to digital illiteracy or lack of access to informatio n, and insufficient
                                consultation with women, youth, and persons with disabilities. To address these challenges, a Stakeholder
                                Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared, , disclosed by the MARHP on January 19, 2026; with a focus on inclusive
                                consultations, regular communication, and the establishment of robust Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs).
                                The use of multiple communication channels (SMS, radio, TV, community meetings) and partnerships with civil
                                society organizations can enhance outreach to marginalized groups. However, the effectiveness of these
                                measures is often limited by resource constraints, lack of capacity, and the absence of a culture of participatory
                                decision-making. Continuous monitoring, adaptive management, and feedback loops are essential to ensure that
                                stakeholder engagement remains meaningful throughout the project cycle.

                          45.     All environmental and social requirements must be fully integrated into the bidding documents before their
                          publication. This includes the inclusion of standard environmental and social clauses, the obligation for contractors to
                          prepare and implement Contractor-ESMPs (C-ESMPs), comply with codes of conduct, manage labor and working
                          conditions, implement waste and pollution control measures, ensure occupational and community health and safety, and
                          establish accessible grievance mechanisms. These clauses will also define clear monitoring responsibilities and reporting
                          obligations to ensure effective supervision of mitigation measures throughout project implementation.

                           E. Implementation

                                                                                                                                               Page 14



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)



                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          46.     The project will be implemented by the MARHP through the DGGREE and the DGPA. Each entity will bear
                          oversight and implementation responsibilities for activities under their purview including all aspects related to financial
                          management, procurement, environmental and social risk management and M&E.

                          47.      The establishment of Project Implementation Units (PIUs) will be launched once the project is effective. This
                          will entail the approval of a Decree, followed by the Decision for the appointment of the dedicated staff. This process can
                          take 12 months from Effectiveness. Up to the approval of the decree, the project will be implemented through staff in the
                          DGGREE, the DGPA and the CRDAs appointed by Decision of the Minister of MARHP, to be received by Negotiations.

                          48.      The DGGREE will be responsible for the implementation of Component 1, Component 2 and of part of
                          Component 4, with inputs from the CRDAs of Beja, Bizerte, Jendouba and Siliana. In DGGREE, a technical coordinator, a
                          procurement specialist, an FM specialist, an M&E specialist and safeguard specialist will be appointed, reporting to the
                          Director General of the DGGREE. In the CRDA of Jendouba, a regional coordinator, a procurement specialist, and an FM
                          specialist will be appointed. A regional coordinator will be appointed in each CRDA of Beja, Bizerte and Siliana, as activities
                          are limited and will be consolidated across CRDAs. The Project Operational Manual (POM) will detail the procedure for




_For Official Use Only_
                          procurement and financial management between DGGREE and CRDAs.

                          49.     The DGPA will be responsible for the implementation of Component 3 (with inputs from GIL, GIVLAIT, GIFruits,
                          ONH, ONF); and part of Component 4. In DGPA, a technical coordinator, a procurement specialist, an FM specialist, an
                          M&E specialist and safeguard specialist will be appointed, reporting to the Director General of the DGPA. The DGPA will
                          collaborate with regional specialists for agricultural production and livestock appointed within the Extension and
                          Agricultural Production Division (Division de la Vulgarisation et de la Production Agricole, DVPA) by the CRDA’s Commissary
                          in each of the four CRDAs involved.

                          50.     A Project Steering Committee will be established to provide project oversight, foster regular coordination
                          between DGGREE and DGPA, review the respective annual work plans and budgets, and validate the respective annual
                          reports. The Project Steering Committee will be chaired by the Minister of MARHP and comprise at least the following
                          representatives: DGGREE, DGPA, DGFIOP, and BPEH from MARHP; MEP; MF; Central Bank of Tunisia, and the CRDAs of
                          Jendouba, Beja, Bizerte and Siliana. The Project Steering Committee will meet at least twice a year. The DGGREE will be
                          the Secretariat of the Project Steering Committee.

                          51.       Project Operational Manual (POM). A POM will be prepared and approved by the World Bank by Effectiveness.
                          It will be updated during the project as needed and subject to World Bank’s prior review.

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank




                                                                                                                                                   Page 15



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Irrigation Water Security, Resilience and Value-Addition Project (P511719)


                           Gabriella Izzi
                           Senior Irrigation Specialist

                           Habab Taifour
                           Lead Water Specialist

                           Mampionona Amboarasoa
                           Senior Agriculture Economist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Ministry of Economy and Planning

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Hydrauliques et de la Pêche, MARHP

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




_For Official Use Only_
                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                     Gabriella Izzi, Habab Taifour, Mampionona Amboarasoa

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:                Michael Haney                            02-Jan-2026

                          Country Director:                        Alexandre Arrobbio                       06-Feb-2026




                                                                                                                                 Page 16



                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
