Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 09/26/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05197




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 27, 2025                                                                            Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P511300                   Program-for-Results Financing (PforR)   UCMID                       2026

                     Operation Name            Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID)

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Uganda                    Uganda                                  EASTERN AND                 Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                       SOUTHERN AFRICA             Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance,      Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban    13-Oct-2025                 04-Dec-2025
                     Planning and              Development
                     Economic
                     Development




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     20-Feb-2025               540,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Program Development Objective is to enhance the institutional performance of participating urban local
                     governments and relevant ministries for urban planning and management, and improve access to sustainable
                     infrastructure, services and local economic opportunities for urban residents and displaced populations in refugee-
                     hosting areas.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Uganda Cities and Municipalities Infrastructure Development (UCMID) Program aims to enhance the institutional
                     performance of urban local governments and relevant ministries for urban planning and management. It seeks to
                     increase access to climate-smart infrastructure, services, and local economic opportunities, benefiting both urban

                    Sep 27, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                     residents and displaced populations in refugee-hosting areas. The program has two main components: Component 1
                     (PforR) focuses on urban development performance and investments, financing resilient infrastructure and services, and
                     promoting peaceful coexistence in refugee-hosting areas. Component 2 (IPF) supports the achievement of Component
                     1's outcomes through national urban planning, technical capacity building, and program management activities. The
                     Program seeks to achieve results in three Result Areas (Ras): (i) RA1: Enhanced local and national level government
                     institutional capacity and performance for sustainable urban management, (ii) RA2: Increased access to climate smart
                     urban infrastructure, services and local economic development, and (iii) RA3: Integrated climate smart infrastructure,
                     services and local economic development for the host communities and refugees. The program will address challenges
                     such as rapid urbanization, inadequate transport infrastructure, lack of integrated urban planning, limited technical and
                     financial resources, climate change impacts, and issues in refugee host districts. It aligns with Uganda’s 2023–2028
                     Country Partnership Framework, building on lessons from the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development
                     (USMID) to strengthen urban service delivery. UCMID will also benefit from an Enhanced Implementation Support and
                     Monitoring (EISM) firm hired directly by the World Bank to support the Project Implementation Support Team (PIST)
                     and the World Bank following the enactment of the Anti-Homosexuality Act 2023 in Uganda. The firm will work with
                     NGO/CSOs and country-based development partners since knowledge of the country context and culture are key
                     considerations to be taken onto account. The EISM will: (i) establish an effective and confidential mechanism to receive,
                     manage, refer, and monitor grievances related to discrimination of Sexual and Gender Minorities (SGM). (ii) support
                     outreach and sensitization to Program beneficiaries and communities. (iii) provide capacity strengthening and technical
                     support to the PIST and (iv) regularly monitor and evaluate the implementation of measures to mitigate the risk of
                     discrimination in all WB’s financed operations in Uganda including UCMID.




Public Disclosure
                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The proposed UCMID Program is a follow-on operation to the USMID and USMID-AF programs aiming to build on the
                     progress and successes under both initiatives. UCMID is urban and nationwide and will be implemented in 3 Ministries
                     Departments and Agencies (Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Lands, Housing and
                     Urban Development, Ministry of Local Government), 10 secondary cities (Jinja, Mbarara, Gulu, Arua, Masaka, Hoima,
                     Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Fort Portal), 11 municipalities (Kabale, Moroto, Tororo, Kitgum, Kasese, Kamuli, Mubende, Busia,
                     Ntungamo, Apac, Lugazi, Entebbe) supported under the previous USMID Program, 14 new municipalities (Masindi,
                     Rukungiri, Bushenyi-Ishaka, Mityana, Kumi, Nebbi, Koboko, Kisoro, Kapchorwa, Ibanda, Njeru, Bugiri, Sheema, Kotido),
                     and 11 districts hosting refugees (Arua , Isingiro, Kamwenge, Kiryandongo, Lamwo, Maddi-Okollo, Moyo, Obongi,
                     Terego, Yumbe).
                     The IPF Component will directly support the achievement of the PforR component by financing upstream activities that
                     enable effective implementation and results delivery under the PforR Component, with a focus on strengthening
                     national systems for urban development, program coordination, and technical capacity at both central and local
                     government levels. Activities include program management (including ESHS and IVA engagement), development of
                     policy and planning tools (urban data platforms, GIS-based systems, digital innovations, national frameworks for
                     climate-smart and inclusive urban infrastructure), technical assistance and capacity building (fiduciary systems, land use
                     management, OHS, CHS, labor and working conditions, climate-resilient planning). It will also support the
                     conceptualization and piloting of a corridor-based approach to urban investment planning, including the development
                     of national corridor design guidelines and investment packaging tools that will help structure integrated infrastructure
                     projects along strategic urban corridors.


                    Sep 27, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)




                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The IPF component will be implemented by MoLHUD, which will also be responsible for overall implementation of the
                     Program and provide oversight of all Program activities. A Program Support Team (PST) will be established to support
                     MoLHUD in (i) Program Coordination, (ii) Procurement, (iii) Financial Management, (iii) Engineering, (iv) Physical
                     Planning, (v) Environmental Management (vi) Social Management and (vi) Communication for the program
                     implementation.

                     The MoLHUD has prior experience implementing World Bank-financed projects and programs, including the Uganda
                     Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID), Competitiveness Enterprise Development Project (CEDP),
                     and Albertine Region Sustainability Development Project (ARSDP). USMID was a Program-for-Results (PforR) initiative,
                     where the World Bank ESF did not apply, while CEDP and ARSDP were implemented under the old Bank safeguards
                     policies (Operational Policies). It is therefore necessary to strengthen capacity within MoLHUD regarding the World
                     Bank’s ESF to ensure effective and efficient management of environmental and social risks and impacts. To support
                     project implementation at MoLHUD, there is a need for environment, health and safety, and social technical support
                     through the recruitment of one Environment Specialist, one Health and Safety Specialist , and one Social Development
                     Specialist on the PST.

                     E&S capacity at the participating cities, municipal councils, and refugee-hosting districts will be further assessed during
                     IPF and Program preparation, including under the ongoing Environmental and Social Systems Assessment for the PforR
                     component, and capacity enhancement measures proposed. The capacity building under the IPF component will also




Public Disclosure
                     aim at strengthening systems and capacities for ESHS risk assessment and management of the local governments and
                     these measures will be further detailed in the A-ESRS.


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate
                     The IPF Component will mainly support technical assistance with minimal or no direct physical works. It will also not
                     support preparation of feasibility studies and designs of investments financed by the PforR. However, it will support
                     the conceptualization and piloting of a corridor-based approach to urban investment planning, including the
                     development of national corridor design guidelines and investment packaging tools that will help structure integrated
                     infrastructure projects—linking roads, drainage, markets, and utility networks—along strategic urban corridors;
                     however, there will be no construction under this component. With these, the environmental risk rating for the IPF
                     component is assessed to be Moderate.
                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Social Risk Rating is substantial. Although activities supported under the IPF component are expected to generate
                     benefits as result of capacity building and improved policies/systems and enhanced urban management, there could
                     be risks relating to stakeholder engagement and social inclusion (e.g., exclusion of vulnerable groups in policy


                    Sep 27, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                     development). Risks of discrimination and exclusion may be exacerbated in the context of the Anti-Homosexuality
                     Act, 2023 and require enhanced implementation support and monitoring. Furthermore, new policies, plans, and
                     systems that are being supported under this IPF component will inform future investments and, if not done properly
                     by incorporating fully relevant ESS requirements in such technical assistance (in terms of reference and the technical
                     assistance provided), it may lead to indirect and downstream social impacts and risks. Despite the MoLHUD’s previous
                     experience with World Bank-financed projects such as USMID, CEDP, and ARSDP, significant challenges have persisted
                     particularly regarding capacity to implement land acquisition and resettlement and use of land donations (extensively
                     and in scenarios where such mode of acquiring land was not aligned with best international practice, including ESS5)
                     and the IPF will provide support in this regard. The presence of refugee populations in several targeted municipalities
                     introduces further vulnerability, heightening the risk of exclusion from project benefits. Robust grievance mechanisms
                     (GMs) are essential for resolving stakeholder or worker grievances and facilitating meaningful engagement. The GMs
                     to be implemented must be well suited to address issues relating to SEA/SH both within the context of institutions
                     and entities involved as well as in communities where the project will interface. Issues relating to recruitment,
                     working conditions and OHS may arise, and therefore implementation of a worker GM (for program staff and
                     consultants) will be essential.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      The risks will be mitigated by ensuring that terms of reference for all the TA activities integrate relevant World Bank
                      ESS requirements and that ESHS staffing and capacity building are implemented and supported at the national and
                      local levels, in line with the ESSs. An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and Stakeholder Engagement
                      Plan (SEP) will be developed by Appraisal for the IPF component, and Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be
                      prepared by effectiveness.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared to guide the process of engagement with stakeholders
                      throughout the project life-cycle. This SEP will be consulted in line with ESS10 requirements and finalized taking into
                      account the outcome of such consultations. The SEP will address risks identified by stakeholders, ensuring the
                      inclusion and non-discrimination of vulnerable groups. The goal of stakeholder engagement is to incorporate their
                      perspectives through meaningful consultations, thereby improving the project's environmental and social
                      sustainability, enhancing its acceptance, and contributing to its successful design and implementation. To ensure
                      effective grievance mechanisms (GMs) in participating municipalities and cities, efforts will be made to establish and
                      strengthen these systems. This will include comprehensive training for district officials, equipping them with the
                      necessary tools and knowledge to support the GM’s implementation and functionality.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      The proposed activities will require a small number of Direct workers and Contracted workers, mainly in the form of
                      technical consultants, for some of the TA activities e.g. development of policy and planning tools, design guidelines,


                    Sep 27, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)



                      and investment packaging tools, engagement of the IVA, capacity building support. Government staff will be
                      governed by Public Service Code of Conduct, Uganda Labor Law. The Program will prepare Labor Management
                      Procedures identifying the main labor requirements (management of workers in accordance with the requirements of
                      national laws and ESS2) and risks associated with the project, and determine the resources necessary to address labor
                      issues. The LMP will detail a grievance mechanism for project workers and measures to address any labor and
                      working conditions issues, including clear terms and conditions of employment, payment of wages, hiring practices,
                      and potential minor OHS risks (e.g. related to travel, workshops, fieldwork) during TA activities.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                              Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant for the IPF component but TORs for studies and development of the tools and design
                      guidelines will integrate requirements under ESS3, as needed.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      Direct risks to community health and safety from the TA activities are considered low. Related TORs will be required
                      to be consistent with ESS4.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                  Not Currently Relevant

                      The activities envisaged under the IPF component comprise technical assistance, capacity building, and policy
                      development support, and shall not involve land acquisition or cause involuntary resettlement. However, it is
                      anticipated that the IPF supports some of technical assistance, including capacity building and training on land



Public Disclosure
                      acquisition and training. The ToR for such technical assistance will incorporate relevant requirements of ESS5 and,
                      hence, this ESS is relevant for the IPF.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                   Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      Not relevant for the IPF component. However, ESIA systems strengthening and capacity building will include
                      requirements under ESS6.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional              Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The relevance of this standard will be further assessed during project preparation as more information and clarity
                      about the selected and confirmed locations and sites for project implementation become available.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                        Not Currently Relevant

                      Not relevant for the IPF component.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not relevant as the project financing will be directly implemented by MoLHUD and does not involve the use of
                      Financial Intermediaries to channel funds to sub-projects.


                    Sep 27, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)




                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                    No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                             No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                        No
                       The Borrower's framework will not be used for the IPF component.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                           No
                       At this stage, use of Common Approach is not envisaged for the IPF Component.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     MoLHUD will prepare and publicly disclose the following environmental and social (E&S) instruments,

                     Prior to Appraisal


Public Disclosure
                     •        Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     •        Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)

                     During Implementation
                     •       Labor Management Procedures (LMP)




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       John Stephen Ajalu                   Title:         Senior Urban Development Specialist

                      Email:                  sajalu@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Phan Thi Phuong Huyen                Job Title:     Senior Urban Specialist

                      Email:                  hphan5@worldbank.org




                    Sep 27, 2025                                                                                                 Page 7 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Uganda Cities And Municipalities Infrastructure Development (ucmid) (P511300)




                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                              John Stephen Ajalu, Phan Thi Phuong Huyen

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                     Brenda Joanne Basalwa Sengendo

                     ADM Social Specialist:                            Santiago Estanislao Olmos




Public Disclosure




                    Sep 27, 2025                                                                                   Page 8 of 8
