Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Hainan Integrated Coastal Ecosystems Management PforR (P512663)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Jan-2026 | Report No: PIDPA00236




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Hainan Integrated Coastal Ecosystems Management PforR (P512663)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                      Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                         Hainan Integrated Coastal
China                          EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC       P512663                       Ecosystems Management
                                                                                         PforR
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                                                                                         Environment, Natural
Program-for-Results
                               09-Feb-2026                 15-May-2026                   Resources & the Blue
Financing (PforR)
                                                                                         Economy
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Hainan Provincial
People's Republic of China     Department of Natural
                               Resources and Planning

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to restore degraded coastal ecosystems, enhance coastal ecosystems
conservation and strengthen institutional capacity for integrated coastal ecosystems management in selected regions
of Hainan Province.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                   720.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                      720.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                      719.43
    Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                                                            0.58
  Total Financing                                                                                           720.00


                                                                                                                 Page 1



                                                                                                         Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Hainan Integrated Coastal Ecosystems Management PforR (P512663)



   Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

 FINANCING
   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                               230.00
     World Bank Lending                                                                                           230.00
   Total Government Contribution                                                                                  490.00


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




 B. Introduction and Context


  Country Context

1. Coastal regions and their ecosystems are vital to global economic prosperity and human well-being, yet coastal
   ecosystems are facing rapid and widespread degradation worldwide. Coastal regions host over 40 percent of the
   world’s population at twice the global average population density. These densely populated and economically
   dynamic areas depend heavily on coastal ecosystems - such as mangroves, coral reefs, and seagrass meadows - for
   essential services including shoreline protection, nutrient cycling, and fisheries productivity. However, these
   ecosystems are under severe degradation due to compounded pressures from pollution, habitat loss,
   overexploitation, and climate change. Globally, only about 15 percent of coastal areas remain relatively intact, while
   mangroves, coral reefs, and seagrass meadows have together lost more than 30 percent of their extent, with annual
   net loss rates exceeding one percent. This degradation is eroding critical ecosystem services, for instance resulting in
   the loss of natural coastal protection for an estimated 1.4 million people each year over the past three decades.

2. Implementing integrated coastal ecosystems management (ICEM) in China aligns with global knowledge priorities
   for the Bank, informing similar efforts worldwide through the World Bank Group’s (WBG) Knowledge Bank vision
   and the newly established China–WBG Global Center for Ecological Systems and Transition (CWGC). With one of the
   world’s longest coastlines - over 18,000 km of mainland coastline and 14,000 km of island coastline - China’s coastal
   provinces support nearly half of the national population. Rapid economic growth and the continued concentration of
   population and economic activities along the coast have driven widespread coastal ecosystem degradation, including
   the loss of 57 percent of coastal wetlands since the 1950s and a decline in natural coastline from 70 percent in 1990
   to just over 40 percent in 2020. The coastal challenges China faces are shared by many other countries, positioning it
   as a potential pioneer in developing scalable restoration solutions and integrated management models. ICEM efforts
   in China is expected to contribute to and benefit from global development knowledge through close collaboration
   with the CWGC - jointly launched in December 2024 by the Ministry of Finance of China and the WBG - which seeks



                                                                                                                       Page 2



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Hainan Integrated Coastal Ecosystems Management PforR (P512663)


     to harness China’s unique development experience - particularly in ecosystem restoration - to tackle similar challenges
     in other countries, while drawing on global knowledge and best practices to improve China’s own efforts.
  Sectoral and Institutional Context

3. As China’s southernmost island province, Hainan Province hosts globally significant coastal ecosystems that face
   growing degradation pressures. With a 1,944-km coastline, Hainan is home to about 30 percent of China’s seagrass
   beds, 25 percent of its mangroves, and the country’s largest distribution of coral reefs, including the highest diversity
   of species. China’s National Master Plan for National Key Ecosystem Protection and Restoration (2021–2035) identifies
   the coastal region as one of seven priority eco-regions and, specifically, calls for an integrated approach to managing
   all terrestrial, riverine, and coastal ecosystems in Hainan. Yet, like other coastal regions globally, these ecosystems
   have experienced severe degradation in recent decades, driven by increasing anthropogenic pressures, including an
   estimated 87 percent decline in seagrass biomass within a decade and the loss of at least 50 percent of fringe coral
   reefs since the 1970s. The degradation of natural coastal barriers has intensified shoreline erosion and heightened
   vulnerability to climate-exacerbated risks, such as storm surges.

4. In response, Hainan has prioritized coastal ecosystems restoration and management as a foundation for its long-
   term sustainable development strategy. Despite recent economic growth driven largely by tourism and services,
   Hainan remains one of China’s less-developed provinces, facing structural constraints, limited fiscal capacity at the
   county level, and heightened vulnerability to climate-exacerbated hazards. In 2025, Hainan issued its Provincial
   Coastal and Marine Spatial Plan (2021–2035), which emphasizes leveraging natural ecosystems for coastal disaster
   prevention and reduction and sets a binding target to maintain a 63 percent natural coastline conservation rate - well
   above the national target. This strategic shift is reinforced by strengthened policies and regulations, including the
   Wetland Protection Regulation (2018), the Mangrove Protection and Restoration Implementation Plan (2022–2025),
   and China’s first local-level Coral Reef Restoration and Protection Action Plan (2023–2025). From 2018 to 2025, Hainan
   restored 150 km of natural coastline, over 1,200 hectares of mangroves and 27 hectares of coral reefs.

5. However, restoration efforts in Hainan have not yet achieved optimal outcomes due to persistent challenges
   including insufficient pollution management, invasive species and climate change impacts. While the coastal waters
   in Hainan largely comply with national quality standards, key ecosystem stressors - particularly pollutants
   like dissolved suspended solids (DSS) and floating plastics - are not routinely monitored and continue to threaten
   vulnerable coastal habitats1. Monospecific restoration for mangroves has introduced alien species that have become
   invasive driving out endangered or vulnerable native species. Climate change further exacerbates these pressures,
   with rising sea levels and warming temperatures driving coastal inundation, saltwater intrusion, land salinization, and
   the degradation of sensitive ecosystems. The Climate and Disaster Risk Screening for the proposed Program therefore
   underscores the need for an integrated approach to ecosystem management to address climate-amplified risks, while
   the World Bank’s Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) for China2 highlights the importance of leveraging
   nature-based solutions (NbS) through ecosystem restoration to advance coastal adaptation and resilience.

6. Addressing these pressures is further constrained by fragmented management institutions, lack of cross-sector
   coordination, and limited baseline understanding. Following the 2018 ministerial reform, China integrated its former
   State Oceanic Administration and the National Forestry and Grassland Administration into the newly established

1 These fine particles reduce light penetration, smother benthic organisms, and impair ecological function of coastal habitats including seagrass and coral reefs.

Mangrove forests are also affected by floating plastics trapped in their root systems, which hinder growth, disrupt physiological functions, and increase tree mortality.
2 World Bank Group (2022) China Country Climate and Development Report. CCDR Series. World Bank Group, Washington, D.C. [link]




                                                                                                                                                                   Page 3



                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Hainan Integrated Coastal Ecosystems Management PforR (P512663)


     Ministry of Natural Resources, mandating it to oversee all ecosystems from land to sea. While this reform represented
     an important step toward ICEM, key drivers of coastal ecosystem degradation - most notably water pollution
     transported through riverine systems from upstream areas - remain under the responsibility of multiple other line
     agencies, for example water, agriculture, and urban and rural development. The lack of effective cross-sector
     coordination and integrated management approach has resulted in gaps and inefficiencies in addressing these
     complex and interconnected challenges. In addition, there remains limited baseline understanding of coastal
     ecosystem conditions (e.g. distribution, health) and their degradation drivers (e.g. pollution sources and hotspots).

7. The proposed Hainan ICEM Program promotes an integrated ‘Ridge to River to Reef’ (3R) approach to restoring and
   managing coastal ecosystems and leveraging them for climate actions, with Hainan well positioned to demonstrate
   replicable and scalable results. As China’s smallest province by land area, Hainan's interior is dominated by forested
   mountains, which act as the island's ‘water tower.’ Over 100 rivers radiate from the central highlands in all directions.
   These rivers serve as natural conveyor belts, transporting freshwater, sediments, nutrients, and, critically, pollutants
   from the interior through human-dominated landscapes to coastal waters. This pronounced ridge-to-reef connectivity
   makes Hainan not only a suitable testing ground, but one of the most compelling global contexts for applying an
   integrated 3R approach to manage coastal ecosystems. The 3R approach builds on the internationally recognized
   “Ridge to Reef” (R2R) framework while placing stronger emphasis on the critical role of riverine ecosystems, whose
   effective management particularly depends on robust cross-sector coordination. Through those efforts, the Program
   will contribute to enhancing coastal resilience to erosion and storm surges, reducing climate-related risks for coastal
   communities, while meeting Hainan’s natural coastline conservation targets.

8. The Program will help close institutional gaps in coastal ecosystem management in Hainan by establishing a system
   for cross-sector integrated management. Building on Program-supported physical investments in ecosystem
   restoration and actions to address key degradation drivers, the Program will support the establishment and
   operationalization of an ICEM system adopting the 3R approach in Hainan Province, spanning sub-provincial to
   provincial levels. Key interventions include: (a) an effective cross-sector coordination mechanism at the provincial
   level; (b) a financial supervision system on ICEM across all coastal counties in Hainan; (c) a cross-sector ICEM planning
   framework in Program counties, together with a provincial roadmap and action plan for scale-up; (d) piloting
   integrated “sky–ground–ocean” monitoring systems to track coastal ecosystem conditions and health; (e) a provincial
   policy on natural shoreline offset to leverage private sector participation in shoreline restoration; and (f) strengthening
   institutional capacity through targeted capacity building, knowledge uptake as well as generation, and sharing.

9. The Program will significantly contribute to global public goods, including climate change mitigation, biodiversity
   conservation, and the reduction of marine plastic and nutrient pollution. Through the restoration of degraded
   terrestrial and coastal ecosystems as nature-based carbon sinks – including forests and blue carbon3 - the Program
   will generate more than 54,000 tCO₂-eq of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction per year, amounting to 1 million
   tCO2-eq GHG emission reduction over the Program’s economic lifetime of 20 years. Recognized as one of the world’s
   36 biodiversity hotspots4, Hainan’s diverse coastal and terrestrial ecosystems provide critical habitats for globally
   significant species and key stopover sites for millions of migratory birds along the East Asian–Australasian Flyway,
   making their restoration and protection vital to global biodiversity conservation. In addition, the Program is expected
   to prevent approximately 66 tons of total phosphorus (TP) and 560 tons of plastic waste from entering the ocean each



3 Blue carbon is the carbon dioxide captured and stored by coastal and marine ecosystems like mangroves, salt marshes, and seagrass meadows.
4 Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund. Biodiversity Hotspots Defined http://www.cepf.net/our-work/biodiversity-hotspots




                                                                                                                                                       Page 4



                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Hainan Integrated Coastal Ecosystems Management PforR (P512663)


     year, contributing to addressing regional and global marine nutrient and debris pollution, two of the nine planetary
     boundaries5 that had been exceeded by 2025.

  PforR Program Scope

10. Government program. The Hainan Provincial Coastal and Marine Spatial Plan (2021-2035) was issued by Hainan
    Provincial Department of Natural Resources and Planning (DNRP) in April 2025. The plan’s main objective is to
    promote ecological protection and sustainable development in Hainan’s coastal region. The Plan outlines seven areas
    of action: (1) coastal natural resources management; (2) coastal ecological restoration and protection; (3) coastal
    industrial layout optimization; (4) coastal living environment improvement; (5) coastal disaster prevention and
    reduction; (6) coastal spatial planning and guidance; and (7) ecosystem-based integrated coastal zone management.
    Among these, the second area of action specifies three main actions: (a) to adopt an integrated approach from ridge
    to reef; (b) to restore and protect critical coastal ecosystems; and (c) to promote land-sea coordinated pollution
    management.

11. The Program-for-Results (PforR) has been identified as the appropriate lending instrument, reflecting both the
    Government’s implementation capacity and its ability to leverage ongoing financing. The Hainan government has
    set out an ambitious, multi-level strategy for coastal ecosystem restoration and management, backed by strong
    commitments from provincial and local authorities. Through alignment with existing government programs, the PforR
    can mobilize significant resources and generate impacts that go beyond those achievable under traditional Investment
    Project Financing (IPF). By linking disbursements to the achievement of verifiable results, the instrument introduces
    performance-based incentives that enhance the efficiency, effectiveness, and impact of expenditures. Building on five
    years of implementation experience for the Government program (2020–2025), Hainan now seeks the Bank’s support
    for the program’s consolidation phase, with a focus on incorporating lessons learned and addressing challenges
    encountered during the initial phase. The Program will be implemented between Fiscal Year 2026 and 2031. This is
    within the implementation period of the Government program (from 2021 to 2035), with the Program preparation
    and implementation period coinciding with the Government’s schedule to implement the 15th FYP (2026-2030) and to
    inform the preparation of the 16th FYP (2031-2035).

12. The proposed Program supports a subset of Government program activities with results expected under three
    Results Areas (RA). RA1 Restore Degraded Coastal Ecosystems focuses on the restoration of degraded coastal
    ecosystems. These interventions are expected to improve ecosystem health and functionality, enhance coastal
    resilience to climate risks, and generate climate mitigation co-benefits through nature-based carbon sequestration;
    RA2 Enhance Coastal Ecosystems Conservation addresses the underlying drivers of degradation, including pollution,
    sedimentation, nutrient loading, and plastic leakage originating from upstream and coastal activities; and RA3
    Strengthens Institutional Capacity for ICEM at county and provincial levels, adopting a 3R approach through cross-
    sectoral planning, improved monitoring, and capacity building..

13. PforR Program Boundary: The Program will finance results achieved under RA1 and RA2 within two selected Program
    counties, i.e. Lingshui and Changjiang counties. These two counties are provincially administered and represent two

5 Planetary boundaries refer to scientifically defined limits of Earth’s natural systems within which human activities can remain environmentally sustainable.




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Hainan Integrated Coastal Ecosystems Management PforR (P512663)


    out of the 25 county/district units in total in Hainan, of which 17 are along the coast. The two counties are selected
    based on three criteria: (a) representativeness of coastal ecosystem challenges; (b) willingness to borrow; and (c) fiscal
    capacity to borrow. The proposed PforR Program boundary is therefore the two Program counties and institutional
    activities at the provincial level to be implemented by DNRP. The Program area accounts for approximately 10 percent
    of Hainan’s total coastal land area as well as coastline. In terms of geographic scope, all proposed coastal ecosystem
    restoration interventions are expected to be located within approximately five km of the coastline.


 C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)

 Program Development Objective(s)

 14. The Proposed Program Development Objective (PDO) is to restore degraded coastal ecosystems, enhance coastal
     ecosystems conservation and strengthen institutional capacity for integrated coastal ecosystems management in
     selected regions of Hainan Province.

 15. PDO-level Indicators:
        • People benefiting from enhanced resilience of terrestrial and aquatic systems. Corporate Scorecard
            Indicator
        • Seascapes under enhanced conservation and/or sustainable management (coastal zones and oceans).
            Corporate Scorecard Indicator
        • Provincial ICEM System established and operational.

 D. Environmental and Social Effects

16. An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) has been conducted for the Program with a thorough E&S
    screening to exclude activities with potential high environmental and social (E&S) risks, including: (a) large-scale
    land acquisition and resettlement which may result in significant negative impacts on affected people; (b) activities
    with the potential to convert/damage critical natural habitats or critical cultural heritage sites, except for legally
    permitted activities such as scientific research, observation and monitoring, or ecological restoration; (c) activities
    with the potential to cause significant adverse E&S impacts, including large-scale marine ecological restoration works
    involving hardware construction that may alter hydrodynamics or affect marine ecosystems (e.g. dredging or
    reclamation exceeding 100,000 m³, temporary cofferdams, or artificial reef projects with material placement
    exceeding 50,000 m³); and forest ecosystem restoration or management activities involving mine pit rehabilitation,
    commercial-scale logging, or other extractive industries; (d) construction of Industrial wastewater treatment facilities
    construction, or large-scale wastewater treatment plant (treatment capacity >100,000 m³/day); (e) Large-scale
    changes in land use, or those inconsistent with national or local land-use planning, or impact on livelihoods arising
    from restricted access or transferred user rights; (f) Marginalization of, discrimination against, or conflict within or
    among, vulnerable social (including ethnic) groups; and (g) Activities that involve, or are located in areas affected by,
    serious unresolved environmental or social legacy issues (e.g. dismantling or rehabilitation of aquaculture facilities or
    other legacy structures).



                                                                                                                          Page 6



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Hainan Integrated Coastal Ecosystems Management PforR (P512663)


17. With these exclusions, the Program’s overall E&S risk is assessed as Substantial. Potential adverse environmental
    impacts from individual activities are largely temporary, construction-related, site-specific, and can be effectively
    mitigated using proven measures. Some activities - particularly ecosystem restoration within ecological redlines or
    protected areas - may pose ecological risks, including disturbance to sensitive habitats, inappropriate species
    selection, and secondary impacts from dredging or shoreline modification. Occupational health and safety risks are
    also present for workers engaged in on-water and underwater activities. These risks are predictable, localized, and
    manageable through appropriate design, species selection, construction timing, and supervision. Ethnic minorities
    constitute a significant share of the population in Changjiang (39 percent) and Lingshui (58 percent); however, the Li
    and Miao communities do not meet all four ESS7 criteria for Indigenous Peoples, as they lack distinct customary
    institutions separate from the mainstream system and do not maintain exclusive collective attachment to ancestral
    territories. Program activities will primarily take place on state-owned land, collectively owned unused land, state-
    controlled offshore waters and shorelines, state-managed river channels, and state- or collective-owned forest land
    without production activities; therefore, no livelihood impacts are expected. While new rural WWTFs, township pre-
    treatment center for the agricultural waste materials recycling center and Centralized Aquaculture Drainage System
    may require small amounts of land, site selection priority will prioritize collectively owned construction or unutilized
    land to minimize the livelihood impact. The NPS pollution control activities for farmland will utilize land acquired
    through voluntary land leasing or land-swap arrangements, with no adverse livelihood impacts anticipated. While
    land-use impacts of individual activities are moderate, the cumulative effects of multiple interventions - together with
    the need for integrated planning, cross-sector coordination, and extensive stakeholder engagement across ridge-to-
    reef ecosystems - justify an overall Substantial E&S risk rating.

18. The ESSA concludes that China has established comprehensive systems to manage the Program-related E&S impacts
    and risks at the provincial and municipal levels. It recommends actions to enhance E&S management capacity and
    contribute to the ICEM of Hainan in an environmentally and socially sustainable way. It identifies several areas for
    improvement in the existing E&S system relevant to the Program: (a) the absence of requirements for land-use due
    diligence and monitoring of land acquisition and leasing processes, which may result in unresolved issues; (b) limited
    stakeholder participation requirements for smaller-scale activities, despite such requirements for major projects; (c)
    operational challenges in some rural wastewater facilities—such as domestic waste and kitchen residues entering
    systems, insufficient flow monitoring, and treatment volumes estimated based on service coverage rather than actual
    inflows—highlighting the need to strengthen community awareness, participation in O&M, and technical optimization
    of influent systems; and (d) OHS risks for workers engaged in coastal, marine, and forest ecosystem restoration
    activities, including drowning, falls, bites, and heat stress.

19. Meaningful stakeholder engagement has been conducted during ESSA preparation. Stakeholders from the Provincial
    and County levels of government agencies and from local communities and other interested parties have been
    consulted in face-to-face meetings, field visits and interviews. The draft ESSA report in Chinese was shared with
    stakeholders for comments in middle of November 2025. The feedback was reflected in the revised ESSA disclosed
    locally on January 08, 20266, and on the World Bank’s website on January 08, 2026. The ESSA summarizes key feedback
    from stakeholder consultations, including with local communities, who expressed strong interest in increased
    employment opportunities and greater participation in program benefits. In response, the PAP includes measures to

6
    https://lr/hainan.gov.cn/xxgk_317/0200/0202/202601/t20260108_400769.html

                                                                                                                        Page 7



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Hainan Integrated Coastal Ecosystems Management PforR (P512663)


   strengthen meaningful community engagement and promote equitable benefit-sharing through culturally appropriate
   approaches, including targeted training and skills development to enhance employment opportunities during Program
   implementation.

20. Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank
    supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to the existing
    program grievance mechanism or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints
    received are promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns. Project affected communities and individuals
    may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection
    Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies
    and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity
    to address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been
    brought directly to the Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For
    information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit
    https://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability
    Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.

E. Financing
                                               Program Financing

                                Source                                   Amount (US$, Millions)         % of Total

  Counterpart Funding                                                            490.00                    68%

  Borrower/Recipient                                                             490.00                    68%

  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                   230.00                    32%

                       Total Program Financing                                   720.00



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Xiawei Liao
   Environmental Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  People's Republic of China




                                                                                                                     Page 8



                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Hainan Integrated Coastal Ecosystems Management PforR (P512663)


Implementing Agencies
 Hainan Provincial Department of Natural Resources and Planning

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Xiawei Liao

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Christophe Crepin               10-Jan-2026

Country Director:                      Lars Christian Moller           30-Jan-2026




                                                                                             Page 9



                                                                                     Official Use Only
