Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
                                   RISE-RAP)(P512975)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                  Project Information Document (PID)

                                                 Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01427




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
     RISE-RAP)(P512975)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                   Operation Name
Angola, Burundi, Congo,        P512975                        Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient
Democratic Republic of,                                       Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Kenya,                                    RISE-RAP)
Lesotho, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mozambique,
Rwanda, Somalia, Federal
Republic of, South Africa,
South Sudan, Sudan,
Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN           03-Feb-2026                    31-Mar-2026
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Investment Project             International Water            International Water
Financing (IPF)                Management Institute of        Management Institute of
                               the CGIAR, AUDA-NEPAD          the CGIAR, AUDA-NEPAD

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To strengthen the capacity of Africa RISE-participating countries to accelerate implementation and performance of
irrigation-related policies and investments.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                             50.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                  25.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                     25.00


                                                                                                                        Page 1



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
       RISE-RAP)(P512975)



   Financing Gap                                                                                                     25.00

 DETAILS
   World Bank Group Financing
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                                     25.00
       IDA Grant                                                                                                     25.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                     Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                      The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Regional Context
1.       Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) confronts unprecedented demographic growth alongside agricultural underperformance
and climate shocks. The region's population will surge to 2.2 billion by 2054, with over 60 percent under age 24. With more
than 58 percent of the population still living in rural areas, irrigation provides a powerful mechanism to create more and
better jobs needed to accompany the longer-term structural adjustment of the economy. It allows particularly smallholder
farmers to significantly improve their yields, incomes and the stability of their enterprise, and create jobs on-farm and in
supporting services and value chains. Agriculture intensification through irrigation would also go a long way in reducing
pressure on the natural environment in a region that has mostly relied on land expansion and is increasingly exposed to
climate change exacerbated shocks.




                                                                                                                          Page 2



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
        RISE-RAP)(P512975)




 Figure 1. Sustainable and unsustainable irrigation over currently irrigated croplands, and potential for sustainable irrigation expansion onto
  rainfed croplands under 3 °C warmer climate. (Source: Nourish and Flourish flagship adapted from Rosa et al. 2019, and Rosa et al. 2020).

2.       Water access, not scarcity, is the critical barrier to agricultural transformation in Africa. SSA is endowed with
abundant water and land resources, offering vast potential for irrigation development, though this potential remains largely
untapped. The vast majority of smallholder farmers face erratic rains as their largest farming risk, with less than 5% of
cultivated land irrigated – compared to over 50% in similar Asian climates. Most farming systems remain low-input and risk-
averse, with crop yields significantly below global averages and SSA accounting for 40% of global agricultural land use
expansion. This vulnerability is intensifying as droughts and floods are on the increase and temperature rise exacerbates
the risk of agricultural droughts. Climate projections suggest that parts of Africa East will become wetter, parts of Africa
South will become drier, and all will be hotter, leading to more intense rainfall, less landscape storage, and much accelerated
agricultural evapotranspiration exposing farmers across the region to much higher agricultural drought risk than under
current conditions. Besides farmers, pastoralists also face growing conflict over rainfed pasture. Resilience demands
immediate, large-scale increase in access to water sources, conveyance and application by smallholder farmers and
evacuation (drainage) of excess water where needed.
3.       SSA possesses vast untapped potential for agricultural water management, and specifically irrigation expansion.
The region withdraws only 7% of its renewable water resources, with potential for sustainable expansion ranging from 6 up
to 47 million hectares1. SSA has the world's largest share of local shallow aquifers—ideal for small-scale farmers due to their
abundance, accessibility, and relatively low extraction costs. Equipping rainfed agriculture with irrigation builds farmers’
resilience to climate change exacerbated and other shocks and stresses by mitigating rainfall risks, spurs agricultural growth,
yields immediate employment gains, reduces pressure on fragile lands from agricultural expansion, and helps decoupling
agricultural GDP from rainfall shocks.
4.      The reasons for underinvestment in the development and management of irrigation in the region are varied and
rooted in deep institutional and policy questions. Colonial model legacies, a singular focus on food security crops with low


1 This is a significant range reflecting different assumptions on types of irrigation, economic viability (From You et al. 2011, to FAO Aquastat, 2020).

This highlights need for improved data under Africa RISE, but also that there is abundant evidence for immense irrigation expansion potential in
SSA. IFPRI (Xie et al. 2018), arrives at middle ground of 19 million ha potential for sustainable irrigation expansion on existing farmland.

                                                                                                                                                    Page 3



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
        RISE-RAP)(P512975)


profitability, poor focus on maintenance and its sustainable financing, a largely technocratic approach insufficiently
addressing land tenure, gender and other social dynamics, and lack of recognition of farmer agency have resulted in
underperforming projects with neglected infrastructure and governance systems lacking accountability and cost recovery2.
This will have to start with a reorientation in public engagement centered around and gathering farmer demand. In public
schemes this is illustrated by the general absence of irrigation service agencies, customer engagement, regulators,
performance metrics or even sector financing and investment plans. Sector performance globally is tied to a strong service
orientation, sustainable finance, accountability, and client ownership, which require a strong policy, institutional and
investment agenda.
5.       Private irrigation referred as Farmer-led Irrigation Development (FLID) has emerged as an effective way to
accelerate and sustain irrigation development. While governments face challenges in investing in, operating and
maintaining large irrigation schemes, smallholder farmers in SSA have been initiating, designing, developing, and managing
irrigation farming on their own. Driven by the growing availability of affordable irrigation equipment, distributed renewable
energy, and digital tools, FLID has become the fastest-growing irrigation model across SSA. A major shift is occurring as
governments transition from implementers to enablers of irrigation access and services. FLID, which saw a major scaling up
when more reliable and affordable technology to access water (groundwater and surface water) accelerated in the recent
decades, enhanced farmer agency and ownership while reducing barriers to technology, finance, knowledge, and markets.
6.        Investment in African irrigation is increasing but remains insufficient and fragmented. Despite a threefold increase
in irrigation-related funding from institutions like the World Bank in the last decade, projects remain modest components
of larger agriculture or climate resilience programs and lack a consistent policy and scaling focus tailored to solutions that
address systemic root causes and work for African smallholder communities. While many countries recognize the need for
increased investment in the irrigation sector, the accompanying policy agenda and systemic sector investment planning is
still to be adopted, fostering evidence-based approaches, addressing the full spectrum of agricultural water management
approaches, strong institutional reforms and governance and adoption of climate-smart agricultural principles with
measurable development indicators aligned with Agenda 2063, in each country and aligned across countries. High
implementation costs, long gestation periods, and variable quality highlight the need for greater emphasis on innovation,
climate resilience, inclusion, skilling the workforce, and sustainable solutions, addressed systematically. Strategic
investment planning needs to focus both on reorienting higher level sector goals and multisectoral policy integration, as
well as addressing the delivery mechanisms and capacities that foster demand-driven, high performing and sustainable
irrigation services.
7.      The proposed Regional Acceleration Project (RISE-RAP) is an integral part of the Africa RISE initiative, which is being
launched by the World Bank, with partners and clients. Its objective is to accelerate access to climate resilient irrigation
services in Eastern and Southern Africa, through national engagements and this regional acceleration project, collectively
designed to flexibly address critical policy, institutional, knowledge and investment challenges in Africa on advancing rural
jobs, adaptation and climate resilience, food and nutritional security, environment and biodiversity, water security and
enabling private capital mobilization. The overall initiative is described in this concept note and in the annex, and provides
important context within which the RISE-RAP operates.


  Sectoral and Institutional Context
8.      Irrigation investments offer a pathway to enhance climate resilience and food security, while creating better
incomes, especially for vulnerable populations including women, youth, and low-skilled workers who are disproportionately
affected by climate variability. Irrigation is foundational to modern agriculture. Achieving the vision of ending hunger,

2 Higginbottom, T.P., Adhikari, R., Dimova, R. et al. Performance of large-scale irrigation projects in sub-Saharan Africa. Nat Sustain 4, 501–508

(2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-020-00670-7

                                                                                                                                                     Page 4



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
        RISE-RAP)(P512975)


extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity, is predicated on ensuring sustainable access to water for productive use.
Providing support to up to 16 national level projects, the RISE-RAP will empower millions of rural households to transform
their agricultural water management practices over the next decade. Given the urgency, the initiative focuses on policy and
investment that have largest traction in terms of outcomes and pace of delivery, hence the focus on three intertwined
pillars of FLID, irrigation services performance and water security. Africa RISE’s multipronged rationale is presented here
below:
9.       Jobs: Agricultural transformation in SSA is a pre-requisite for more and better jobs. In SSA, while agricultural
employment share is declining, the absolute numbers of workers and people dependent on agriculture continue to grow,
with over 50 % of the population remaining rural and directly dependent on agriculture3,4. A global analysis using a Multi-
Region Input-Output (MRIO) framework finds that development of all sustainable irrigation potential globally would create
around 240 million jobs (direct and indirect) of which the majority, 218 million jobs, in SSA. This increase in jobs means that
in SSA about 4 jobs are created for each hectare of rainfed agriculture that can be sustainably converted to irrigation5. The
results of the MRIO are consistent with assessments in the literature. Irrigated agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa generates
approximately 1.5 to 2 direct jobs per hectare each year. Additionally, for every direct job created, an estimated 1.1 to 1.8
indirect and induced jobs arise. This results in a total of 3.7 to 5.6 jobs per hectare of irrigated land. A study conducted in
South Africa's Northern Cape region demonstrates the multiplier effects of irrigation: irrigated agriculture in this area
directly generated approximately 18,000 on-farm jobs, primarily in high-value crop production. This direct employment
subsequently supported about 4,000 additional positions in input supply industries such as farm equipment and agro-
chemical sectors. Furthermore, the increased income from irrigated agriculture resulted in the creation of an estimated
13,000 induced jobs within the local economy, spanning retail trade, food services, construction, transportation, and other
industries serving the improved farm communities. A SAM model analyzing an investment of XOF 25 billion in irrigation
infrastructure in Niger and Côte d'Ivoire demonstrated an increase of approximately 9,703 additional full-time equivalent
(FTE) jobs in Côte d’Ivoire and 6,881 additional FTEs in Niger, primarily within the sectors of agriculture, trade and logistics,
and food processing6. Studies report a wide range of employment multipliers for irrigation development, reflecting
differences in project types, economic contexts, and research methodologies. Enhanced irrigation capabilities increase rural
non-farm employment and contribute to economic and human capital development7. Rising incomes induce further
employment in local businesses, thereby reinforcing a cycle of job creation both within and beyond agricultural sectors8.
10.      Adaptation and resilience: Every dollar invested in sustainable irrigation access builds resilience and adapts to
climate risk. A major contributor to household vulnerability, food insecurity, and low productivity is the exposure to
increasing climate variability. With only about 3% of farmers, and about 5% of agricultural land having access to irrigation,
agricultural production and rural incomes are vulnerable to rainfall shocks9. The RISE-RAP project through all its activities is


3 Christiaensen, Luc, and Brooks, Karen. 2019. In Africa, More Not Fewer People Will Work in Agriculture. Consultative Group for International

Agricultural Research (CGIAR) [blog].
4 Giller, Ken et al. 2021. The future of farming: Who will produce our food? Food Security. 13.
5
  Taheripour and Chepeliev. 2025. Assessing economic impacts of changes in irrigated area: A global analysis using a Multi-Region Input-Output
(MRIO) framework based on GTAP 2017 data base. Background Paper. Nourish and Flourish Flagship. World Bank.
6
  See Sangare, Alkassoum Saadatou; Ehuitché, Béké Tite; Tankari, Mahamadou (2024) : Assessing employment and labour market effects of rural
infrastructure investments in the Sahel region: Cases of Niger and Côte d'Ivoire, ZEF Working Paper Series, No. 233, University of Bonn, Center for
Development Research (ZEF), Bonn https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/301183/1/1895395194.pdf
7
  Saha, S., Alam, M. J., Al Abbasi, A. A., Begum, I. A., Rola-Rubzen, M. F., Parikh, P., … & McKenzie, A. M. (2025). Effect of irrigation on rural
transformation and income at the district level in Bangladesh. PLOS One, 20(6), e0326504. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0326504
8
  Blakeslee, D., Fishman, R., Hora, T. and Zaveri, E. forthcoming. The Role of Irrigation in Local Development: Evidence from around the World.
Backnground Paper. Nourish and Flourish Flagship. World Bank (forthcoming)
9 Hannah Ritchie 2022 - “Increasing agricultural productivity across Sub-Saharan Africa is one of the most important problems this century” Published

online at OurWorldinData.org. Retrieved from: 'https://ourworldindata.org/africa-yields-problem' [Online Resource] and FAO.

                                                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
        RISE-RAP)(P512975)


designed to enable adaptation by addressing the underlying causes of vulnerability to climate change at the systemic level
in the country’s smallholder farming systems. Most countries have developed only a small portion of their sustainable
irrigation potential, leaving significant scope for building resilience. With the ability to stabilize production in the face of
increasing rainfall variability, irrigation offers concrete adaptation and resilience benefits. The continuum of agricultural
water management solutions for productive water use, from supplemental irrigation to fully controlled irrigation, and from
individual farms to public irrigation service delivery, and integration of livestock systems, enable buffering against dry
shocks, year-round production that allows food production in off-seasons, and crop diversification towards climate-resilient
and economically beneficial value chains. Utilizing both surface and groundwater and incorporating landscape storage
increases resilience to accelerated water demand, dry spells, droughts and floods10. The African Union Commission’s (AUC)
Framework for Irrigation Development and Agricultural Water Management (IDAWM)11 emphasizes agricultural water
management as a key climate adaptation strategy and it is included in many Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs).
Irrigation costs are consistently recognized as cornerstone of adaptation strategies and adaptation costs are a fraction of
costs of no action1213.
11.     Food and nutrition security: Most countries in SSA are net-food importers, and food insecurity, malnutrition and
chronic hunger are common and on the rise across the region14. Smallholder farming in Africa represents the majority of
farms and an outsized role in local food production and food security. Many smallholder households in Africa today are
food insecure themselves, and raising their sustainable productivity is key to their own food security and to wider economic
development and regional food security, and with rapid growth of population and food demand this transition is urgent.
12.      Private Capital Mobilization: The RISE RAP is aligned with the Mobilizing Finance for Development principles, and
together with IFC and MIGA will support activities under national projects that mobilize up to US$ 1.8 billion in private and
farmers' capital through national investment projects. RISE-RAP will prepare the tools and support the policy agenda to
enable country sector reform and private capital mobilization. Among the most significant implementation barriers to
conversion of rainfed agriculture to irrigated agriculture are the high initial investment costs for farmers to adopt new
practices and technologies in place of rainfed irrigation systems, putting irrigation beyond the financial and experiential
reach of many without external support, and the need for stronger supply chains for advanced irrigation technologies in
underserved markets. The Africa RISE Initiative will develop regionally appropriate and country specific financing and de-
risking solutions that close the affordability gap, and leverage public and private investment. These will include, as
appropriate, a) results based financing mechanisms with blended finance, rebates and matching grants, b) performance
based payments for irrigation service providers, c) pay-as-you-go irrigation (PAYGO), d) financing for early stage irrigation
companies including digital platforms (fintech and AI), e) developing market linkages through farmer aggregators, f) support
to establish an SME network of service providers, and g) risk share facilities to encourage financial institutions to massively
scale up access to capital for farmers. Further, the Africa RISE Initiative will also work on building a larger capital pool with
support from donors, philanthropic and impact investors, and work with commercial lending institutions by developing risk
sharing facilities and credit enhancements. The RISE RAP provides technical assistance to countries in implementing these
models through country projects that increase private sector participation and leverage commercial capital. Matching
grants, under the challenge fund and country projects, will be targeted to the private sector that are verified as private
capital enabling (PCE).

10 Srivastava, Bhavya; Edochie, Ifeanyi N.; Goyal, Aparajita; Dabalen, Andrew. 2024. Agriculture Production Potential of Groundwater Irrigation in

Sub-Saharan Africa. Policy Research Working Paper; 10885. World Bank
11
   African Union Commission (2020), Framework for Irrigation Development and Agricultural Water Management in Africa
12
   Global Center on Adaptation (2023) – Accelerating Adaptation Finance – Africa and Global Perspectives.
13
   Global Center on Adaptation. 2023. State and Trends in Adaptation Report 2023.
14 FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO. 2024. The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2024 – Financing to end hunger, food insecurity

and malnutrition in all its forms. Rome.

                                                                                                                                             Page 6



                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
       RISE-RAP)(P512975)


13.      Innovation: The Africa RISE initiative will pioneer innovation through an integrated digital agriculture ecosystem
approach that links farmers, agri-tech entrepreneurs, service providers and governments to transformative technologies,
financing mechanisms, and technical expertise. Building on successful regional service delivery models from Kenya, Ethiopia,
and Uganda, and models from Asia such as India (UP, Gujrat, West Bengal) the initiative will scale up the use of digital
solutions such as remote sensing, digital platform solutions and IoT to enable real-time water resources monitoring. Tools
like WaPOR and Google Earth Engine enable near real-time monitoring of irrigation, improving efficiency, resilience, and
inclusive water use. Digital solutions enable effective gathering of farmer demand and Results-Based Financing, while
deploying/embedding mobile applications that empower farmers with access to subsidies through digital voucher systems,
credit information, and innovative payment and service models like PAYGO and Irrigation-as-a-Service. The digital
agriculture ecosystem approach within the RISE initiative will engage youth as drivers of innovation, empowering them to
deliver these business models to smallholders while generating income and building scalable enterprises.
14.       Structuring Africa RISE as a regional initiative with a Regional Acceleration Project (RISE- RAP) supporting aligned
individual country projects, offers strong benefits from scale, coordination, and cross-learning. Africa RISE is a regional
initiative, consisting of (i) aligned country projects (existing portfolio and new lending, based on strong country policies and
plans committing to essential reforms and investments); and (ii) the regional acceleration project. It addresses the
constraints of fragmented, single-project interventions by enabling alignment, shared delivery models, and stronger
partnerships across countries. Irrigation markets and services often operate regionally, and scaling through shared supply
chains can reduce costs and improve efficiency. This requires policy alignment, including the AUC’s IDAWM (and work
towards easing tax and import barriers, cost of doing agri-business and harmonized procurement strategies). A regional
approach also enables shared benchmarks and performance metrics that incentivize countries to excel while fostering
mutual support. Co-designed with Africa RISE countries, the project will embed national priorities, support faster rollout,
and build a collective knowledge base through ongoing cross-country learning and south-south knowledge exchanges within
a One WBG approach.




                                                                                                                           Page 7



                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
         RISE-RAP)(P512975)




Figure 2. Structure of the Africa RISE Initiative and the Regional Accelerator Project


  Relationship to Regional Priorities and Frameworks
15.        The overall Africa RISE initiative, that RISE-RAP is designed to support, has the objective of increasing the number
of people with enhanced access to climate resilient irrigation services in Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE). It is the
organizing framework for World Bank engagement with partners and clients on the irrigation agenda in AFE countries, and
it is fully aligned with the AUC IDAWM framework, and supports broad aspirations of client countries in the sector, along
three pillars selected for their criticality in accelerating access sustainability, scaling potential, and value for money. The
pillars are (i) Farmer-led Irrigation Development, (ii) Improving Performance of Existing Irrigation, and (iii) Ensuring Water
Security for Resilient Irrigation. Each pillar is focused on the binding constraints for sustainable intensification through
irrigation, including policy and regulations, data and knowledge, investment facilitation and de-risking, institutional capacity,
and accountable governance. Each pillar addresses key vulnerabilities to climate change:




                                                                                                                            Page 8



                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
        RISE-RAP)(P512975)




     Figure 3. Pillars of Africa RISE Regional Initiative

16.      Pillar 1: Accelerating Farmer-Led Irrigation Development (FLID) – This pillar expands Farmer-led Irrigation
Development (FLID) in Africa by removing key barriers for smallholders—limited knowledge, technology, finance, and
market access to to empower them driving investment. Following structured market assessments and FLID diagnostics15,
and in partnerships with producers, suppliers, value chain actors, it drives private sector investment through developing an
innovative results-based financing (RBF) facility, standardization, and policy alignment to create efficient, scalable markets.
A stronger enabling environment and de-risking will unlock financing for farmers, offtakers, and suppliers. A digital
agriculture approach, using remote sensing, mobile apps, and youth-led agri-tech, will improve information access, service
delivery, and supply chains. Energy solutions like those supported through M300/ASCENT will enhance productive use.
Backed by WRG, IFC, and MIGA, the pillar promotes private capital and explores guarantees to reduce risk. FLID enhances
resource efficiency, strengthens resilience to increasing climate variability and change, and supports stable employment
and livelihoods.
17.     Pillar 2: Driving Performance of Existing Irrigation Systems - The pillar will support performance-based rehabilitation
and modernization of existing irrigation schemes, as well as improve service delivery of these schemes in Africa through
policy and institutional reforms, technical assistance, and targeted investments. This brings a shift from engineering
solutions to utility-accountability frameworks, promoting performance-based professionalization of irrigation services. By
leveraging tools like the World Bank's irrigation Operator of the Future (ioF) toolkit 16, it supports operators in improving
service delivery, financial sustainability, and accountability. It also considers the rehabilitation and modernization of

15
   Izzi, G., J. Denison and G.J. Veldwisch, eds. 2021. The Farmer-led Irrigation Development Guide: A what, why and how-to for intervention design.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
16
   Waalewijn, Pieter, Francois Onimus, IJsbrand de Jong, Remi Trier, Jonathan Denison, Florence Deram Malerbe, Philippe Saura, Etienne Dressayre,
Eeman Amjad, and Svetlana Valieva. 2022. The Irrigation Operator of the Future: A Toolkit; Information Pack for Irrigation Service Delivery
Performance Assessment and Planning. (Updated September 2023.) World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                                                                                                                              Page 9



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
          RISE-RAP)(P512975)


irrigation schemes at all scales, integrating governance and improvements to ensure resilient systems. This comprehensive
approach includes capacity building, innovation, and the use of advanced technologies. Higher performance of services
leads directly to higher incomes, better jobs, improved resilience to agricultural drought through improved access to blue
water. Innovations will include integrating flood and drought resilient design elements, improved energy solutions,
integration in smart water allocation strategies and system-level water efficiency where required.
18.      Pillar 3: Ensuring Water Security for Resilient Irrigation – This aims to promote development-oriented agriculture
water resource planning, monitoring, and management. It addresses current resource challenges and plans for future
climate uncertainty including drought mitigation using advanced digital tools like AI, remote sensing, WaPOR and big data
analytics to model future climate scenarios, stress test irrigation services and infrastructure for climate change exacerbated
extreme events and enhance decision-making and accountability. It upholds reliable water development and access through
low-cost storage solutions (e.g., farm ponds, system storage, sand and check dams, shallow aquifer recharge, rainwater
harvesting), groundwater exploration/drilling markets and nature-based approaches, enhancing resilience to increasing
hydrological variability. Additionally, the pillar supports water accounting, groundwater governance, and the integration of
digital solutions to create climate-smart irrigation systems and create feedback loops between irrigation equipment, natural
resources platforms and digital services through IoT solutions. The pillar will also support the enhancement of GHG
accounting methods for projects to better understand how irrigation enhancements can efficiently reduce emissions from
business-as-usual scenarios and access carbon finance. It intends to build long-term institutional capacity for resilient,
productive and inclusive water management.
19.      Africa RISE Regional Initiative aligns closely with both regional and global development priorities as articulated by
various agencies and declarations. The African Union Framework for Irrigation Development and Agricultural Water
Management (AUC, 2020) provides a strategic blueprint to guide sustainable irrigation expansion, improve water
productivity, and enhance climate resilience across the continent. It complements the Malabo Declaration (2014), which
commits member states to doubling agricultural productivity and strengthening resilience through increased investment in
water management. Furthermore, the AU’s Agenda 2063 identifies sustainable agriculture and water security as
foundational pillars for inclusive growth and socio-economic transformation. Regional Economic Communities, such as EAC,
COMESA and SADC, reinforce these commitments through their respective Regional Agricultural Investment Plans, which
prioritize irrigation and climate-smart agriculture.
20.      The Initiative is an integral part and organizing framework for regional alignment with the Water Security and
Climate Adaptation (WSCA) Global Challenge Program (GCP), and the Water for Food and Water for the Planet pillars under
the new Water Strategy. The WSCA GCP intends to scale up climate-resilient irrigation to increase food production and
water productivity as a core pillar, with an emphasis on sustainable expansion of irrigation in Africa.17 Africa RISE represents
the articulation of the global vision of the World Bank for water security in Eastern and Southern Africa through harnessing
water for productive use, water stewardship and drought mitigation in the main water-consuming sector of the region. It
builds on existing partnerships on irrigation across the World Bank within the Planet VPU across Water, including WRG,
Agriculture and Food, Environment, Climate Change, and with the Energy GP, FCI, MTI, and with IFC and MIGA in a Joint
Implementation Plan (JIP) built on national Sector Assessment Programs where available (Water SAPs); and with private
sector partners (through 2030 WRG). Africa RISE will link closely with AgriConnect given the criticality of improved irrigation
to strengthened agriculture value chains in AFE. Africa RISE-RAP is well aligned with IDA21’s GROW framework as it advances
the WSCA GCP, aims at significant adaptation co-benefits and supports regional resource development and trade across up
to 16 countries. GROW IDA will accelerate and leverage country investments in a flagship adaptation sector, and are aimed
at quick disbursing and easily scalable activities.


17
     World Bank.2024. Global Challenge Program: Fast-track Water Security and Climate Adaptation. Approach Paper

                                                                                                                             Page 10



                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
       RISE-RAP)(P512975)



 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To strengthen the capacity of Africa RISE-participating countries in Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) to accelerate
 effective implementation and improve performance of irrigation-related policies and investments.


  Key Results (From PCN)
 PDO Indicator 1: Number of national programs, policy reforms or investment plans aligned with Africa RISE in enabling
 result-based financing in FLID, accountable service delivery, and/or water security.
 PDO Indicator 2: Number of countries demonstrating improved institutional capacity and data-driven decision making
 for irrigation, as measured by agreed benchmarks including FLID diagnostics and iOF metrics.
 PDO Indicator 3: Number of projects supported with concrete implementation acceleration tools developed under Africa
 RISE-RAP, including subscription-based tools, services, technical assistance to streamline operations, resources
 management, and enhanced coordination among public and private stakeholders.
 PDO Indicator 4: Number of stakeholder platforms with public, private and farm stakeholders convened for high-level
 dialogues to co-develop irrigation financing mechanisms, tools, and investment cases, and including a costed JIP for
 public and private investment in advancing sector goals.
 PDO Indicator 5: RBF platform/mechanism through which private capital can be invested operational and resulting in
 US$ matching grants targeted to private-sector enabled irrigation investment.


 D. Concept Description
21.       The Regional Acceleration Project will transform disparate national irrigation efforts into a consolidated initiative
across AFE. The regional acceleration project will support countries across Africa RISE pillars through facilitating strategic
collaboration, innovation, and enhanced in-country implementation. It has three targeted components implemented
through AUDA-NEPAD (with AU-SAFGRAD) as regional convening partner, the International Water Management Institute,
providing technical implementation support and academia (as described in more detail below). The RISE-RAP project
provides major economies of scale, allows rapid and systematic cross-border learning, the emergence of a regional dialogue
with private sector and across client countries that will enhance policy shift and investment acceleration, and ensures
alignment with continental water resource management frameworks. While country investments in the irrigation sector
will inevitably be embedded in broader water, agriculture, climate programs depending on country opportunities, RISE RAP
provides the regional strategic direction that can benefit a variety of country-level realities. Implementation under the
African Union Framework for Irrigation Development and Agricultural Water Management leverages strategic policy and
implementation shifts that are both critical at country level and for the region as a whole. A regional learning agenda to
support learning how to scale and achieve policy objectives with global and regional networks of academic institutions, and
skilling the workforce through inclusive vocational training is an essential part of sector transformation. Africa RISE-RAP
establishes an enabling infrastructure that transcends individual national capacities, strategically positioned to attract both
private investment and public development funding.
22.      Africa RISE-RAP will support the strategic alignment through country policy and investment plans and support
eligible country projects that are aligned with Africa RISE and preparing or implementing at least one of the three Africa
RISE pillars. Africa RISE will require coherence and alignment under the AU framework through strong country policy and
investment plans. Countries joining the Africa RISE Initiative will develop an investment plan stating their needs, plans, and

                                                                                                                          Page 11



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
        RISE-RAP)(P512975)


ambitions. The plans will include statements of sector policy that highlight alignment with the regional AU framework, the
core principles of Africa RISE on enabling FLID, driving performance and ensuring water security – including tackling
droughts, floods and extreme heat; along with a concrete set of policy and investment actions that Africa RISE will support.
The Africa-RISE Regional Acceleration Project will provide technical support just-in-time based on these plans’ contents,
articulation of policy actions to be proposed for Development Policy Operations (DPOs), performance of countries
subscription-based services through lead specialists for knowledge, exchange, benchmarking, challenge funding, regional
dialogue, and direct implementation support in participating countries. This will support national programmatic alignment
and support regional integration on irrigation while maintaining maximum flexibility in terms of local financing,
implementation methodologies, and timelines.
23.       Africa RISE-RAP identified four strategic scaling support themes—institutions and markets, finance, knowledge, and
regional alliance building, justifying a strong regional approach through integration, economies of scale, political leverage,
and regional capacity building. The project is structured in three complementary components that address these different
functions. The RISE-RAP will provide tailored operational, analytical, and technical assistance based on each country’s
readiness, ranging from programmatic planning and investment preparation to implementation support. At the same time,
it will advance regional dialogue, market development, knowledge exchange, and innovation uptake. As the Africa RISE
initiative necessitates a fundamental reconsideration of delivery mechanisms to achieve its outcomes for irrigation
throughout the region, this regional architecture supports cross-system application of critical lessons, supported by robust
institutional frameworks to deliver substantial results at scale.
24.      Africa RISE-RAP is proposed for US$25 million from the IDA GROW resources, with the intention to fund-raise the
remaining US$ 25 million, and it will leverage up to US$ 2 billion in public investment and up to US$ 1.8 billion in private
capital through country investment programs that are aligned with Africa RISE. The RISE-RAP regional finance is critical for
regional dialogue, funding and emergence of nationally aligned and capacitated programs. At country and regional level
there is dialogue with development partners on joint implementation support and potentially pooling of resources. There
is strong alignment with IFAD, bilateral partners (KfW, AfD, JICA) and FAO on the overall Africa RISE initiative, and during
preparation parallel or direct co-financing will be explored and level of effort will be commensurate with budget. There are
advanced technical discussions with the Gates Foundation on a proposal for potentially funding the development of digital
tools for water informatics and results-based financing under RISE (tentatively US$ 6-8 million TBC). Aligned country
programs will be developed in parallel with Ethiopia and Kenya operations most advanced for FY26 and FY26/27
respectively. These country programs are also intended to utilize GROW resources.

RISE-RAP Components
Component 1: Regional framework for coordinated policy action, harmonization, benchmarking and country exchange

25.     This component will provide a common regional framework for action and mobilize and coordinate resources for
impact. It will support data collection, benchmarking, policy and regulatory alliance with the AU IDAWM framework, and
support the development of national policy and investment planning that is aligned with this vision, ready for
implementation, and borrowing from best regional and international practice:
•     Providing a coordinated framework for action through developing aligned policy and investment pathways, principles
      and standards that countries can adopt and adapt in their policy and investment planning. RISE-RAP will leverage
      existing country-led multi-stakeholder platforms that promote public-private dialogue. This explicitly includes the
      development of a common approach to implementation modalities, typical fiduciary approaches and
      templates/scoping for ESF instruments within the common frameworks across countries, development
      partners/financiers and other stakeholders.

                                                                                                                           Page 12



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
       RISE-RAP)(P512975)


•   Elevate successful national models, invest in evaluations, pilot design and lesson learning and impact stories to enhance
    learning and accelerate scaling. Early examples are Kenya’s development of a comprehensive and RISE-aligned National
    Irrigation Sector Investment Plan, the hydro-informatics work supporting decision making in Burundi and Kenya, private
    sector platforms in Rwanda, Kenya and Ethiopia, the East Africa Irrigation Financing Facility supported by 2030 WRG
    and IFC, and integration of irrigation dialogue in CCDR such as in Zimbabwe and Zambia.
•   Support high level and technical annual exchanges, roll out a regional knowledge and training and trainee program, and
    develop the regional tools for hydro-informatics, AWM diagnostics, country scans, climate adaptation, market scans,
    Results-Based Financing Facilities, and regional benchmarking. This component will also strengthen exchange and
    structured learning with highly successful results based financing models from India (UP and Gujarat).
•   Enhance regional as well as national trade and market dialogue with private sector, farmers’ organizations, civil society
    and manage a challenge program for innovation in the region (regional markets, industry, agencies) to support the
    development of regional markets for irrigation equipment, manufacturing of irrigation technologies, irrigation advisory,
    installation and maintenance support services. This includes dialogue on technical and service standards in the market,
    improving national performance metrics for irrigation services, learning from regional experience, removing barriers to
    scaling through harmonizing public support programs, market incentives and tax regimes (primarily at national level but
    also in cross-border trade). National markets will greatly benefit from increased alignment in certification, cross-
    empaneling of companies, local production and trade, and standards that reflect good practice suitable for the region’s
    farmers.
•   Mobilize and coordinate resources for impact. It will develop a mechanism to pool funds from multiple sources,
    philanthropic, climate and patient capital, allowing for a larger capital base in addition to public funding, and IFI grants.
    This capital can be used to leverage larger investment from markets for scaling FLID and mobilizing resources from the
    private sector. A large capital pool with long-term investment horizons is intended to help boost investor and market
    confidence. It will design and host a challenge fund for implementation-related performance, with targets on readiness,
    institutionalization, reaching targets and efficiency gains, which will be accessible to all implementing countries to
    incentivize innovation and scaling.
26.     This component will be implemented through African Union Development Agency - New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (AUDA-NEPAD) with technical guidance from AU-Semi-Arid Food Grains Research and Development Agency
(AU-SAFGRAD). AUDA-NEPAD’s mandate is economic and social development across the region, including regional
collaboration, achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, addressing climate change and adaptation, working on
Water investment projects. AU-SAFGRAD have been championing the transformation of the irrigation sector under the
Agenda 2063 and the IDAWM framework. In the last 7 years, the World Bank and AU SAFGRAD have partnered on high level
policy advocacy through regional development dialogue, benchmarking and training. Through leveraging these roles, the
implementation of regional and sectoral development initiatives is efficiently harmonized and progress tracked over scale
and time. AUDA-NEPAD will be the grant recipient and implementing agency of the AU. It has strong satisfactory fiduciary
record in implementing IDA financed projects The component will provide long-term Technical Assistance and institutional
capacity support to these implementing agencies of AU to effectively fulfil the abovementioned regional mandates in
advancing the country-level facing intended impacts in the field of irrigation and agricultural water management, thereby
ensuring continued regional learning and exchange for greater country level impact.
Component 2: National and Regional Scaling Support
27.     This component will support the technical implementation capacity enhancement at regional and national level,
aligned with country policy and investment plans. This component will provide the knowledge base, tools, institutional
capacity strengthening to national, devolved and INGO/private sector to effectively plan and implement all Africa RISE pillars


                                                                                                                           Page 13



                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
       RISE-RAP)(P512975)


and the scaling themes. While seeking economies of scale in developing common tools and implementation mechanisms,
the component’s national level support will address specific country priority challenges with national institutions. This will
take the form of:
•   Strengthen regional and national implementation capacities: tools and subscription-based services for adaptation and
    use in direct implementation support in participating countries. This will support national programmatic alignment and
    support regional integration on irrigation while maintaining maximum flexibility in terms of local financing,
    implementation methodologies, and timelines. Activities to be included in this technical support include, but are not
    limited to: FLID diagnostic tools, RBF designs at regional and country level, FLID targeting support, digital platforms on
    irrigation advisory; irrigation technology innovation, climate finance integration and government modalities for FLID
    support (pillar 1); digital tools and academy around the irrigation operator of the future framework, climate scenario
    modeling, tariff policy and registration support; economics, performance based financing modalities, sustainable
    intensification reform (pillar 2); technical solutions for water security, green and grey water storage, water informatics
    and water accounting, household integrated water security policy, multiple use services (pillar 3) as building
    blocks/implementation tools and modalities for achieving the targets in-country and at the regional level.
•   Provide direct technical assistance to clients, the regional implementing agencies (AUDA-NEPAD and AU-SAFGRAD) and
    their implementing partners (including financial intermediaries and private sector) for in-country implementation,
    building on the regional tools and capacities and through long-term and short-term technical assistance in
    implementation. This technical assistance will be fully aligned with the regional framework and country demands as
    expressed in their policy and investment plans, which may include specific financial intermediaries, private sector
    platforms, and implementing agencies (regional authorities, irrigation service providers, banks, foundations, NGOs).
•   Diagnostic support to prepare country lending operations and during implementation. Carry out FLID diagnostics on
    the potential, enabling environment and binding constraints and review performance of irrigation service delivery and
    policy efficacy together with knowledge partners (component 3) that help inform evidence-based and targeted
    investment plans (e.g. the National Irrigation Sector Investment Plan in Kenya) reflecting the higher level policy
    objectives, key constraints, water resources profile, market maturity, financing envelopes and institutional capacity to
    deliver, integrating regional good practice, exchanges and innovations. It will support clients in building strong feedback
    loops for farmers, companies, civil society as scaling programs are rolled out, and adaptive management to ensure
    impact-orientation of specific investment planning and monitoring.
•   Strengthen regional and national irrigation and water informatics in support of Africa RISE. Benefiting from economies
    of scale and through regional tools and innovations, the project will provide decision makers and farmers with evidence
    base and knowledge products and mapping to make informed decisions, benchmark performance and track progress.
    This activity will strengthen the regional capacity and frameworks for data value chains and provide inputs into the
    scaling support at national level.
28.      The technical assistance will include support in various phases of investment preparation. It includes (i) support to
selectivity and reform targeting higher level objectives effectively and integrating considerations of climate chance
adaptation and mitigation, jobs, economic growth and inclusive development into intervention design (ii) support to
technical documents, implementation modalities, relevant ESF instruments; (iii) support to drafting programs, plans,
strategies and policy notes for the sub-sector; and (iv) capacity building activities to institutions on carrying out or
overseeing activities that advance the projects. While actual interventions and investment preparation (technical designs)
will be carried out under national projects. Capacity strengthening will take the dual form of longer-term country level
technical assistance and training programs to implementers, trainers of trainers, internship and young professional
programs, university and TEVET curricula strengthening, as well as agile just-in-time support based on a roster of
consultants, technical experts that can be mobilized and thematic leads that proactively anticipate capacity enhancement

                                                                                                                          Page 14



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
         RISE-RAP)(P512975)


needs. This will be a mix of online and in-person communities of practitioners and learning arrangements. This component
will be implemented by the regional implementing agency for technical support (IWMI) under the overall auspices of the
AUDA-NEPAD as regional implementing agency for convening and as agreed with individual country projects.
Component 3: Learning and Adaptive Management
29.     This component will support the long-term learning agenda under Africa RISE that is critical to underpin the
ambitions to scale interventions, adapt to changing circumstances, and ensure lessons from implementation support
learning, adaptive management and policy adjustment. The component supports the development of a regional platform
for academic learning, knowledge and peer exchange, advocacy, communication, thereby connecting the national projects
and providing the platform for learning and accelerated implementation. This component addresses fundamental learning
questions on how to scale interventions effectively and monitor their attribution to higher level goals (in the context of
major policy and investment modality shifts in each country under Africa RISE). This component will:
•     Support a regional/international applied research program with networks of regional academia (e.g. Waternet,
      RUWORO, SAFI, Africa Centers of Excellence) and their global partners to apply innovative applied research on scaling
      irrigation. The project will support MSc and PhD research, directly linked to project implementation and with academic
      independence to provide feedback loops to the policy dialogue and implementation pathways, while also reflecting on
      the longer-term strategic challenges and opportunities.
•     Support quantitative and qualitative research to support adaptive learning. This is directly applied research for impact
      of interventions, as well as furthering the understanding of social, cultural, economic and political dynamics surrounding
      irrigation scaling. This may include comparative case studies, action research, as well as experimental research and
      RCTs, and mixed methods to enrich monitoring, evaluation and adaptive management of the project.
•     Innovation labs to serve as a platform for experimentation, technology development, policy research and capacity
      building. With good success under USAID/CGIAR programs in the past, these will be targeted to develop and test
      appropriate technologies, build farmer-centered solutions, improve impact and use of solutions, and support capacity
      building through relevant targeted messaging and user feedback loops. Innovations will feed into water informatics,
      policy and financing models and irrigation planning under pillars 1 and 2.
•     Support learning and capacity sharing events for clients, consultants, partners (including private sector)



    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                        Policies                                                      Triggered?
    Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          TBD
    Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



    Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




                                                                                                                            Page 15



                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
       RISE-RAP)(P512975)


Overall, the Project will bring about positive benefits of fostering regional collaboration and knowledge sharing in
sustainable management of agricultural water resources for climate resilience and economic development. No civil work
is envisaged under this program, but in subsequent individual country programs. Thus, the policy dialogues and TA
activities are unlikely to create significant direct or indirect environmental risks or impacts to the biophysical
environment or the institutional stakeholders or other potentially affected parties at the regional and local levels.
Nevertheless, low to moderate negative impacts and risks are expected, primarily associated with the generation of
both general as well as electronic waste respectively from general office operations and from acquiring and operating
data center hardware for the MIS, insignificant increase in energy usage in offices including the regional hub/data
center, and occupational hazards related to ergonomic conditions for project workers both in office settings and from
work-related travels. The outputs of TA type activities, including for irrigation programs and investment plans, will have
downstream environmental, safety and health impacts and risks when implemented at country levels. To address these
risks, UNDA-NEPAD will prepare and disclose and ESCP prior to appraisal and implement it throughout the project; TA
activities shall be undertaken in compliance with the World Bank’s Advisory Note on Technical Assistance and the ESF,
with the specific TORs agreed on with the Bank; and SESA will be prepared and disclosed before individual programs and
plans arising from the TAs can be implemented. Given the envisaged low to moderate magnitude of the environmental
risks and impacts of the program and implementing entities experience with Bank standards and past performance, the
environmental risk is considered Moderate. Social risk are considered Substantial. Direct project risks includes: i) risks of
unfair treatment, discrimination, and non-compliance with labor standards among project staff, consultants, and
partners. ii) occupational health and safety (OHS) concerns, especially for those involved in fieldwork, data collection, or
training activities. iii) risks of sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment (SEA/SH). iv) the potential exclusion of
vulnerable groups—including women, ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities, and individuals living in remote
areas—from fully accessing and benefiting from project interventions. v) the reforms may increase the cost of water for
irrigation or alter access to resources for vulnerable and low-income groups. vi) a risk of elites’ capture of the reform
rather than reaching smallholders or marginalized communities. While the RISE-RAP itself does not finance land
acquisition, future projects influenced by its outputs may involve land acquisition, resettlement, or changes in land use,
with associated risks of displacement, loss of livelihoods, and social disruption. A comprehensive Stakeholder
Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared and implemented to ensure meaningful and inclusive consultations. In addtion,
Labor management procedures will be put in place to ensure fair and safe working conditions for all project workers.
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) should be formulated to ensure that these risks are identified and
managed in line with the mitigation hierarchy in the ESF.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank




                                                                                                                          Page 16



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
     RISE-RAP)(P512975)


 Pieter Waalewijn
 Lead Water Resources Management Specialist

 Si Gou
 Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

 Jeren Kabayeva
 Senior Agriculture Specialist

 Jeehye Kim
 Senior Agriculture Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 International Water Management Institute of the CGIAR

 AUDA-NEPAD

Implementing Agencies
 International Water Management Institute of the CGIAR

 AUDA-NEPAD

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                      Pieter Waalewijn, Si Gou, Jeren Kabayeva, Jeehye Kim

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                 Frauke Jungbluth                          12-Aug-2025

Country Director:                         Amit Dar                                  07-Oct-2025



                                                                                                                        Page 17



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
The World Bank
Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy Initiative (Africa
RISE-RAP)(P512975)




                                                                                                                   Page 18



                                                                                                         Official Use Only
