Public Disclosure Authorized
                               Kazakhstan/Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
                                 under the Ministry of Ecology and Natural
                                                Resources


                               Phase 3: “Kazakhstan One Health for Pandemic


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                 Prevention, Food Systems Resilience, and
                                            Ecosystem Health ”
                                                 (P512214)


                                STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN (SEP)



Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                                   2026
Table of Contents
Abbreviations ......................................................................................................................................... 3
1.      EXECUTIVE RESUME .................................................................................................................... 4
2.      PRELIMINARY INFORMATION AND INTRODUCTION ................................................................... 5
2.1 Target SEP ........................................................................................................................................ 5
2.2 Objectives of the SEP....................................................................................................................... 5
2.3 Description of the project ................................................................................................................. 7
2.4 Legal Framework ............................................................................................................................ 10
2.4.2 World Bank Standards ................................................................................................................ 12
3.      STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS ....................................................................... 13
3.1 Marginalized/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups ............................................................................ 16
4.      STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM ............................................................................... 24
4.1 Goal and Timeframe of Stakeholder Engagement Program .......................................................... 24
4.2 Proposed Disclosure Strategy ........................................................................................................ 26
4.3 Proposed strategy for listening to the voices of vulnerable groups .............................................. 29
 5.              RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLANNED
ACTIVITIES UNDER THE SEP .................................................................................................................. 30
5.1 Resources required ........................................................................................................................ 30
5.2 Project Implementation Arrangements ......................................................................................... 30
6.      GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM (GRM ) .............................................................................. 32
6.1 Grievance Mechanism in Kazakhstan ............................................................................................ 32
6.2 Receipt of complaints...................................................................................................................... 34
6.3 Monitoring and Reporting of Grievances ............................................................................................ 34
6.4 The World Bank's Grievance Redress System...................................................................................... 35
7.      MONITORING AND REPORTING ................................................................................................ 38
7.1 Involvement interested sides V activity for monitoring ................................................................. 38
7.2 Reporting before in groups interested sides .................................................................................. 38
8.      ANNEXES ................................................................................................................................... 39
ANNEX 1. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITY LOG ...................................................................... 39
ANNEX 2. FORMAT COMPILATIONS PROTOCOL CONSULTATIONS WITH STAKEHOLDERS ................. 40
ANNEX 3. FORM SUBMISSIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS COMPLAINTS................................................ 41
9.      MINUTES OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTATIONS ....................................................................... 44
9.1 List of Participants in the Discussion of the ESCP and SEP ............................................................ 46
10.     REPORT ON STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS .......................................................................... 59
                                  Abbreviations

CONCLUSION   DESIGNATION
WB           World Bank
WHO          Worldwide organization healthcare
GBV          Gender-based violence
PIU          Project implementation Unit
PAD          Project Appraisal Document
MoH          Ministry of Health of the Republic of Kazakhstan
MENR         Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan
GRM          Grievance Redress Mechanism s
MoA          Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Kazakhstan
NGO          Non-governmental organization
SEP          Stakeholders Engagement Plan
UNDP         United Nations Development Program
ESMP         Environmental and social management plan
ESCP         Environmental and social commitment plan
PIM          Project implementation manual
GRS          Grievance Redress Service
SEA/SH       Sexual Exploitation and Abuse / Sexual Harassment
ESS          Environmental and Social Standard
AMR          Antimicrobial resistance
PrDO         Program Development Objective
1. EXECUTIVE RESUME

The purpose of this Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is to identify an appropriate program and
plan for stakeholder engagement in the design , implementation and final results o f t h e One
Health Project
in Kazakhstan, as Phase 3, "Kazakhstan One Health for Pandemic Prevention, Food Systems
Resilience, and Ecosystem Health”. The SEP is designed to create an effective platform for productive
engagement with potentially affected parties and stakeholders. Effective stakeholder engagement is
a necessary aspect of any successful project. The SEP for a One Health Project will help inform project
design and implementation while managing beneficiary and stakeholder expectations for project
outcomes.

The One Health approach provides a strategic pathway to reduce the risk of pathogen transmission
from domestic and wild animals to humans and eliminating threats to sustainability food systems of
Central Asian countries. Recognizing connection between human health, animal health and their
shared ecosystems, The One Health project provides a practical, comprehensive, and multisectoral
framework for pandemic prevention. The project will be financed through a grant of US$1.79 million
from the Pandemic Fund (which corresponds to the part of the multi-country project "Pandemic
Preparedness and Response through a One Health Approach in Central Asia," for which the World
Bank (WB) is designated as the implementing agency and Kazakhstan as the beneficiary). The
Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources (MENR) of Kazakhstan will be responsible for project
implementation; in particular, a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established within the
MENR.

This SEP outlines the initial stakeholder engagement activities organized by stakeholder groups,
interests, and topics of consultation. Stakeholder groups include government agencies, development
partners, civil society, civil society organizations, and academia. These stakeholder groups also cover
affected and other stakeholders, the key characteristics of vulnerable groups, and their specific
needs. The Stakeholder Engagement Program also includes detailed information on the purpose,
timeline, and methods for stakeholder engagement as well as a One Health strategy for disclosure
that responds to vulnerable groups. .

A brief description of key institutions and key individuals (focal points) was included in the SEP to
simplify the definition of roles and responsibilities. The Project's Grievance Mechanism (GRM) will
be integrated into the existing grievance system in Kazakhstan.




                                                                                                      4
2. PRELIMINARY INFORMATION AND INTRODUCTION

2.1 Target SEP

    Effective stakeholder engagement is a vital part of project management and is a comprehensive
process that spans the entire project lifecycle. When properly designed and implemented, it fosters
strong, constructive, and responsive relationships that are essential for successfully managing a
project's environmental and social risks. Stakeholder engagement is most effective when initiated
early in the project development process and is an integral part of early project decision-making, as
well as assessment, management, and Monitoring the project's environmental and social risks and
impacts. Early involvement and ongoing dialogue with stakeholders. Also allow on more early stage
identify potential Stakeholder concerns and risks are identified as they arise or before they arise,
ensuring more appropriate project development. There is clear evidence that the higher the level of
stakeholder engagement, the more thoroughly potential impacts are identified. This contributes to
a stronger and more sustainable relationship between stakeholders and project proponents. This is
especially true for groups and individuals most directly affected by planned projects. Establishing
trust between parties through a participatory process that allows for open and constructive
interaction is recognized as key to the satisfactory resolution of complaints and issues that, if left
unaddressed, could threaten development through unplanned delays and costs.

2.2 Objectives of the SEP

    Main goal this Plan interactions With interested parties (SEP) is the definition of an appropriate
program and plan for interaction with stakeholders parties, which will be apply on throughout total
the Project implementation period and which will contribute to the achievement of the program's
priority objectives actions "One health" For prevention pandemics, Food system sustainability and
ecosystem health in Central Asia. This document is designed to create an effective platform for
productive engagement with potentially affected parties and other stakeholders in the project's
implementation and outcomes. The specific objectives of this plan are summarized below in Table 1.




                                                                                                     5
                          Table 1. Objectives of the SEP
                Task                                         Rationale
Identification of      all relevant Involving as many stakeholders as possible will facilitate
stakeholders                        inclusive communication and cover a wide range of issues
 for this Project                   and concerns. Identification of key stakeholders who will
                                    be directly or indirectly affected by the project (including
                                    vulnerable groups), as well as those whose interests may
                                    influence project decision-making..


Stakeholder            Engagement Describes the planned stakeholder engagement approach
Methodology                       and outlines a range of strategies to ensure timely,
                                  relevant, and accessible engagement with stakeholders
                                  throughout the project life cycle.


Dissemination of accurate project Ensuring that stakeholders, especially those directly
information in an open and affected by the proposed Project, have information at
transparent manner                their disposal so that they can make informed comments
                                  and plan for the future. This reduces uncertainty and
                                  anxiety. Information should enable affected parties to
                                  better understand potential impacts, risks and benefits.
                                  An open and transparent approach is central to achieving
                                  these goals. .




Capture and address          public Documenting stakeholder concerns enables tracking and
concerns,   questions          and motivating design decisions and allows stakeholders to
suggestions                         see the extent to which their contributions have been
                                    included in planning and design. This approach addresses
                                    potential concerns that stakeholder engagement may be
                                    a symbolic gesture from the developer, which complies
                                    with legal requirements but is not taken seriously when
                                    planning a project. .




Manage stakeholder expectations Stakeholder expectations, both positive and negative, may not
                                     always align with project realities. Managing expectations and
                                     ensuring they remain realistic reduces the risk of
                                     dissatisfaction and unmet expectations among affected parties
                                     during project implementation.



                                                                                                      6
                                     Frustration and unfulfilled expectations are key drivers
                                     of conflict and require otherwise avoided mitigation
                                     and management are key drivers of conflict and
                                     require     otherwise avoided mitigation and
                                     management. .
 Advice on compliance           with Ensuring            regulatory compliance can avoid
 national, World Bank,          and potential project delays that are more likely to be
 international standards             related to procedural issues, rather than significant.


Against this background, the project:
   • Ensure that information is regularly, timely, accessible and appropriately disseminated to all
       stakeholders, particularly to individuals and groups directly affected by the project, prior to
       consultation and decision-making;
   • Ensure planned and transparent consultations with appropriate notice, clear disclosure of
       purposes and an agreed process for engagement, registration and follow-up;
   • Ensure that consultations involving women, youth, the elderly and other vulnerable groups
       are fully socially inclusive;
   • Provide stakeholders with the opportunity to provide advice and input into the project;
   • Integrate feedback into project or program design and be accountable to stakeholders;
   • Provides a two-way dialogue that gives both parties the opportunity to exchange opinions
       and information, listen and have their concerns heard and addressed;
   • Promote effective agreements and partnerships by mutually identifying areas for cooperation
       and undertaking good faith negotiations in this context;
   • Report regularly in a structured manner to all stakeholders, with a focus on appropriate
       reporting among participating communities;
   • Establish and maintain the management capacity, responsibilities, and systems for effective
       implementation under the SEP;
   • Create clear mechanisms for responding to people's problems, suggestions and complaints .

2.3 Description of the project
The proposed project in Kazakhstan will be part of the One Health Program for Pandemic Prevention,
Food System Resilience, and Ecosystem Health in Central Asia (the One Health Program). The
program includes five Central Asian countries: Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic,
Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.
The objective of the Program (PDO) is to strengthen capacity for the prevention, detection, and
response to priority zoonotic diseases, antimicrobial resistance, and food safety issues in Kazakhstan
within the framework of the One Health approach at the national and regional levels, with a
particular focus on establishing a governance mechanism and strengthening existing infrastructure
and systems to improve prevention, detection, and response capabilities. The structure of the
Program-level components is presented below :
Component 1: Strengthening governance within the One Health initiative (US$0.26million). This
component aims to establish foundational elements for effective governance and intersectoral
collaboration in Kazakhstan. It will promote women's leadership by establishing a quota for their
representation in the interagency One Health coordination structure. Furthermore, within this
component, climate change adaptation and mitigation will be integrated into all strategic
consultations and governance strengthening activities. Activities will support the development of
                                                                                                     7
multisectoral planning and coordination for the One Health approach, the creation of a legal
framework, data sharing, as well as communication and engagement with stakeholders listed by the
implementing agencies listed below:
           a) Ministry of Agriculture (US$0.006 million) .
              1. Development and implementation of a digital communications campaign to raise
                  public awareness of zoonotic diseases and veterinary preventive measures,
                  including:
                  - videos and social advertising about vaccination and diagnostics of animals;
                  - digital information materials (brochures, infographics);
                  - distribution of materials through online platforms and interdepartmental
                  communication channels USD 6,000
           b) Ministry of Health (US$0.023 million).
              1. A roundtable discussion was held on the development of regulatory mechanisms
                  for interagency cooperation in planning, coordinating, and monitoring measures
                  related to zoonotic diseases, antibiotic resistance, biosafety, and food safety.
                  ( USD 6,000)
              2. Conducting a workshop to engage target communities and audiences to raise
                  public awareness of animal-to-human infections within the framework of the One
                  Health concept in Kazakhstan. ( USD 3,500)
              3. Organization and implementation of joint events by representatives of the
                  Ministry of Health of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Ministry of Agriculture of the
                  Republic of Kazakhstan, and the Ministry of Economy and Natural Resources of
                  the Republic of Kazakhstan, with distribution of booklets on the prevention of
                  infections transmitted from animals to humans to target groups of the population.
                  ( USD 13,000)
           c) Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources (US$0.045 million ).
              1. Conducting a national coordination meeting on the development of a national plan
                  for intersectoral cooperation using the One Health approach to prevent mass
                  mortality of saigas in Kazakhstan, including an emergency response algorithm for
                  cases of mass mortality of saigas. ( USD 12,000)
              2. Regular technical meetings of the working group are underway to develop a
                  national plan for intersectoral collaboration using the One Health approach to
                  prevent mass saiga mortality in Kazakhstan, including an emergency response
                  algorithm for cases of mass saiga mortality. (USD 32,500)
           d) Interagency One Health Coordination Structure (USD 0.160 million)

               1. Technical assistance to the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Health and the
                  Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources - US$190,000
               2. Reserve (unforeseen expenses) - $50,000

Component 2 : Strengthening the Knowledge Base and Human Resource Capacity within the One
Health Initiative (US$0.2 million). This component aims to build and disseminate knowledge on the
One Health approach in the country. The project will also help institutionalize and implement the
One Health approach by strengthening the relevant capacity of specialists in agriculture, veterinary
medicine, environment, and public health. The list of activities by implementing agency is provided
below.
            a) Ministry of Agriculture ($0.030 million).
                                                                                                    8
               Organization of targeted training events for users of the information system for
               registration and control of veterinary drugs on issues and acquisition:
               - control over the rational use of antimicrobial drugs in order to prevent and monitor
               antimicrobial resistance (AMR);
               - acquisition of the main derivatives of the information system (server, etc.);
               - the role of the veterinary service in the system of surveillance of zoonotic diseases in
               the context of "One Health".
               International exchange of experience in implementing an information system for
               regulating the circulation of veterinary drugs in EU countries with advanced
               experience in this area. Visit by Kazakhstani specialists.
           b) Ministry of Health (US$0.048 million). Advanced training in the course “Basic program
               in applied epidemiology with a One Health approach” (150 hours, 19 participants).
           c) The Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources ($0.040 million) will conduct regional
               trainings and seminars on emergency response measures to mass saiga die-offs using
               the "One Health" approach.
Component 3 : Strengthening Zoonotic Disease Surveillance Capacity within the One Health Initiative
($1.030 million). This component aims to strengthen national and regional laboratory networks to
support the implementation of risk-based surveillance and monitoring plans and response measures
developed under Component 1. The initial focus will be on enabling the implementation of the
national One Health action plan. Specific activities supported by implementing agency are listed
below.
           a) The Ministry of Agriculture ($0.364 million). The allocated amount will be used to
               finance the following activities: Creation and implementation of a state information
               system for the regulation and circulation of veterinary drugs, aimed at providing a
               unified platform for managing data on veterinary drugs and the traceability of
               veterinary measures, including the prevention of and response to zoonotic diseases.

            b) Ministry of Health (US$0.350 million). This component will finance:
                  1. UV - Vis spectrophotometer Cary 60, Cary WinUV software, 10 mm quartz
               cuvette 3.5 ml (2 pcs/pack), Workstation; computer, monitor, printer, Uninterruptible
               power supply.
                  2. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is a method for separating,
               identifying, and quantifying the concentration of one or more compounds in complex
               mixtures. Samples of mixtures can be obtained from foods, chemicals,
               pharmaceuticals, biological, environmental, and agricultural products, etc., which are
               previously dissolved in liquid solutions (liquid phases).
                  3. The polarimeter (saccharimeter) is designed to measure the percentage
               concentration of sucrose in transparent solutions (sucrose in syrups and drinks;
               glucose, fructose, maltose, lactose in solutions).
                  4. The milk quality analyzer is designed for the rapid determination of the
               percentage of fat, protein, dry nonfat milk solids (SNF), added water, density and
               temperature of a sample of fresh, canned, pasteurized, normalized, reconstituted,
               skim milk and long-life milk.
            c) The Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources (US$0.316 million). The allocated
               amount will be used to finance the following activity: Establishment of a National
               Center for Ecological and Epizootic Monitoring of the Saiga Antelope in Kazakhstan.


                                                                                                        9
Component 4: Project Management, M&E, and Learning (US$0.3 million). This component will support
project management, M&E, and activities that enhance learning from this project. Specific activities
supported are listed below:
Project implementation unit (PIU) (US$0.2 million). This will support the PIU in establishing framework
to manage, track, and communicate project progress, including the operating cost, compliance with
E&S requirements, M&E system, and gender mainstreaming training, communications and
dissemination activities.
Interagency One Health Coordination Structure (US$0.1 million). The allocated funds will support the
following activities: Establishing and supporting a delivery unit with equipment and a workplace to
facilitate coordination and implementation of One Health activities. It is planned to recruit four full-
time staff members.

 2.4 Legal Framework

 a) Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan (adopted on August 30, 1995, with amendments)
 According to Article 31 of the Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the state aims to protect
 an environment favorable for human life and health and to provide the necessary conditions for the
 realization of the right of citizens to a healthy environment.
 This provision is of key importance for the surveillance of zoonotic diseases within the One Health
 approach, as preventing the spread of infectious diseases transmitted from animals to humans is
 directly linked to the protection of public health and the environment.

 b) Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan "On Public Health and the Healthcare System" (dated July 7,
 2020)
 The Code regulates public relations in the field of health protection and sanitary and epidemiological
 welfare of the population.
 In the context of surveillance of zoonoses, the Code provides for:
     - state sanitary and epidemiological control and monitoring of infectious diseases;
     - conducting epidemiological investigations;
     - measures to prevent the spread of particularly dangerous infections;
     - interaction of government agencies in the field of healthcare, veterinary medicine and
         environmental protection.
 The Code also allows for the participation of public associations, scientific organizations, and
 international partners in activities aimed at disease prevention and raising public awareness.

 c) The Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan "On Veterinary Medicine" (with current amendments and
 additions)
 The law regulates relations in the field of veterinary safety, prevention and elimination of animal
 diseases, including diseases that pose a danger to humans (zoonoses).
 Within Stage 3, this law is key because it provides for:
     - the system of state veterinary control;
    - mandatory registration and recording of animal diseases;
     - laboratory diagnostics of infectious diseases;
     - response measures to disease outbreaks in wild and farm animals;
     - exchange of information between veterinary and sanitary-epidemiological services.

 d) Environmental Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan (dated January 2, 2021 No. 400-VI ZRK)
                                                                                                      10
The Environmental Code defines the legal, economic and organizational foundations for
environmental protection and environmental safety.
In the context of zoonotic disease surveillance, the following points are important:
protection of ecosystems and biodiversity, including wild animal populations (in particular, saiga
antelopes);
prevention of negative impacts of economic activities on the natural environment;
Ensuring access to environmental information (Article 13), which is important for the transparency of
data on wildlife diseases and environmental risks.
The Environmental Code also supports a cross-sectoral approach to managing risks associated with
the environment and public health.

e) Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan “On Specially Protected Natural Areas” (dated July 7, 2006)
This Law regulates relations in the field of organization, protection and management of specially
protected natural areas.
In the context of zoonotic disease surveillance, it is important because:
    - Many populations of wild animals, including saigas, are found in protected areas;
    - monitoring of diseases of wild animals should be carried out taking into account the protection
        regime of territories;
    - Any sampling, monitoring or research activities must comply with environmental legislation.

f) Environmental safety (regulation within the framework of industry laws)
The Republic of Kazakhstan does not have a separate law "On Environmental Safety." However,
relevant issues are regulated by:
    - Environmental Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan;
    - legislation in the field of health care and veterinary medicine;
    - by-laws governing the monitoring of the environment, biodiversity and infectious diseases.
In Phase 3, this means a coordinated approach between environmental, veterinary and sanitary
services is needed.

g) Labor Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan (dated November 23, 2015)
The Labor Code regulates labor relations and is important for ensuring safe working conditions for
specialists involved in:
    • epidemiological investigations;
    • laboratory diagnostics;
    • field research and collection of biological samples from animals;
    • responding to disease outbreaks.

h) Land Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan (dated June 20, 2003)
The Land Code regulates the use of land, including areas where the following may be carried out:
    • monitoring of wild animal populations;
    • sampling of soil, water and biomaterials;
    • placement of temporary or permanent monitoring points.
Rational use of land and its protection are directly related to the prevention of environmental factors
that contribute to the spread of zoonotic diseases.

i) Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan “On State Guarantees of Equal Rights and Equal Opportunities
for Men and Women” (dated December 8, 2009)
                                                                                                    11
This Law ensures equal opportunities for women and men to participate in the project's activities,
including:
    • education and training in zoonotic disease surveillance;
    • participation in intersectoral working groups;
    • employment in laboratory and field research;
    • decision-making within the framework of project implementation.

2.4.2 World Bank Standards
The World Bank's Environmental and Social Standard (ESS) 10, Stakeholder Engagement and
Disclosure, recognizes "the importance of open and transparent engagement between the Grant
Recipient and stakeholders of the project as an essential element of international practice" (World
Bank, 2017: 97). In particular, the requirements set out in SES 10 are as follows:
    • "Grant recipients will engage with stakeholders throughout the project life cycle, beginning
        such engagement as early as possible in the project development process and in a timeframe
        that allows for meaningful consultations with stakeholders on project design. The nature,
        scope, and frequency of stakeholder engagement will be proportionate to the nature and
        scale of the project, as well as its potential risks and impacts.
    • Grant recipients will conduct meaningful consultations with all stakeholders. Grant recipients
        will provide stakeholders with timely, relevant, understandable, and accessible information
        and consult with them in a culturally appropriate manner, free from manipulation,
        interference, coercion, discrimination, and intimidation.
    • The process of stakeholder engagement will involve, as further described in this ESS: (i)
        stakeholder identification and analysis; (ii) stakeholder engagement planning; (iii)
        information disclosure; (iv) stakeholder consultations; (v) a process for addressing and
        responding to grievances; and (vi) reporting to stakeholders.
    • As part of the environmental and social assessment, the Recipient will maintain and disclose
        a documented record of stakeholder engagement, including a description of the stakeholder
        consultations that took place, a summary of the feedback received, and a brief explanation
        of how feedback was or was not included." (World Bank, 2017: p. 98).
The Grant Recipient will develop a stakeholder engagement plan commensurate with the nature and
scale of the project and its potential risks and impacts. This should be disclosed as early as possible
and prior to project appraisal, and the Grantee should seek stakeholders' views on the SEP, including
identification of stakeholders and suggestions for future engagements. If material changes are made
to the SEP, the Grantee should disclose the updated SEP (World bank, 2017: p.99). ESS10 requires
the Grantee to also propose and implement a grievance mechanism to obtain and facilitate
resolution of concerns and grievances of project-affected parties related to the environmental and
social performance of the project in a timely manner (World Bank, 2017: p. 100).
For more information about the World Bank's Environmental and Social Standards, please follow the
links below:
www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/environmental-and-social-
framework/brief/environmental-and-social-standards                   and        http://projects-
beta.vsemirnyjbank.org/ru/projects-operations/environmental-and-social-
framework/brief/environmental-and-social-standards




                                                                                                     12
3. STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS

Stakeholders include individuals or groups directly or indirectly affected by the project, as well as
those who may have an interest in the project and/or be able to influence its outcomes, both
positively and negatively. To develop an effective SEP, it is necessary to first identify the stakeholders,
their groups, and subgroups.

To ensure effective and thoughtful communication, stakeholders of the proposed project can be
grouped into the following main categories:
   i. Affected parties are individuals, groups and organisations within the project's sphere of
      influence who are directly affected or may be affected by the project and/or who have been
      identified as the individuals (groups) most sensitive to changes associated with the project
      and who should be actively involved in the process of identifying impacts and their
      significance, as well as in the process of making decisions on measures to reduce or manage
      impacts;
  ii. Other stakeholders are individuals, groups or organizations who may not be directly affected
      by the Project, but who believe that the Project affects their interests and/or who could in
      some way influence the Project and its implementation process;
      Vulnerable groups are individuals who, due to their vulnerability, may be disproportionately
      affected or further disadvantaged by the implementation of the project(s) compared to other
      groups 1 and for whom special engagement measures may be required to ensure equal
      representation in consultations and decision-making processes related to the project. .

     iii.   Table 2 below lists key stakeholder groups and subgroups that may have an interest in the
            project and/or be able to influence its outcomes, both positively and negatively. This list of
            stakeholders will likely expand and/or change in composition as the Project progresses, and
            since the SEP is a "living document," it will be updated regularly (at least annually) throughout
            the Project's life as needed.


1
  Vulnerable status may be due to an individual's or group's race, national, ethnic or social origin, skin colour, sex,
language, religious, political or other belief, characteristic, age, culture, level literacy, disease, disability as a result physical
or mental disorders, poverty or economic disadvantage, and dependence on unique natural resources.

        Table 2. List of stakeholders of the One Health Project in Kazakhstan.
      Stakeholder - Group                                       Stakeholder - Subgroup

                                            I. AFFECTED PARTIES
Government Institutions of Kazakhstan
    Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources -    Committee on Forestry and Wildlife
    (MENR)                                    -    Project implementation unit
                                              -    Territorial Inspectorates of Forestry and
                                              Wildlife Committee of the Ministry of Ecology
                                              and Natural Resources
                                              -    Environmental       organizations     and
                                              enterprises

                                                                                                                                   13
 Ministry           of Agriculture    (MoA)       - Committee for Veterinary Control and
                                                    Supervision
                                                  - Subordinate organizations and enterprises of
                                                    the Ministry of Agriculture
 Ministry           of Health                     - Committee for Sanitary and Epidemiological
 (MoH)                                            Control
                                                  - Subordinate organizations and enterprises of
                                                    the Ministry of Health
 Local Governments (Regional Akimats)            - Veterinary Department
                                                 - Department of Natural Resources and
                                                 Environmental Management
                                                 - District akimats
                                     II. Other stakeholders
                                         - RSE on the Right of Economic Management
 Other governmental, public, commercial and
 non-commercial organizations and groups of “Institute of Zoology” of the Science
 individuals                                Committee of the Ministry of Science and
                                                   Higher Education of the Republic of
                                                   Kazakhstan
                                              -    Public Association “Kazakhstan Association
                                                   for the Conservation of Biodiversity (ACBK)”
                                              -    Union of Livestock Breeders of Kazakhstan
                                              -    Farming enterprises (farms)
                                              -    Local population (local communities)
                                              -    Hunting enterprises (game management
                                                   entities)
                                              -    Societies of hunters and fishers
                                                   Hunters




Table 3 below describes the roles and influence of the above stakeholder groups within the Project.

    Table 3. The role and influence of stakeholder groups in the One Health Project in Kazakhstan.
   Stakeholder - Group                                          Roles And influence
                                  I. AFFECTED PARTIES
State authorities of Kazakhstan
 Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources   1.                 Conducting a national
 (MENR)                                    coordination meeting on the development of
                                           a national plan for intersectoral cooperation
                                           using the "One Health" approach to prevent
                                           mass mortality of saigas in Kazakhstan,

                                                                                                      14
                          including an emergency response algorithm
                          for cases of mass mortality of saigas.
                             2.                    Regular         technical
                          meetings of the working group are underway
                          to develop a national plan for intersectoral
                          collaboration using the One Health approach
                          to prevent mass saiga mortality in Kazakhstan,
                          including an emergency response algorithm
                          for cases of mass saiga mortality.
                              3.                   Conducting       regional
                          trainings and seminars on emergency
                          response measures to cases of mass saiga
                          deaths using the "One Health" approach.
                              4.                   Establishment of a
                          national center for ecological and epizootic
                          monitoring of saiga in Kazakhstan.
Ministry of Agriculture       1.                            Development
                          and       implementation        of     a    digital
                          communications campaign to raise public
                          awareness of zoonotic diseases and veterinary
                          preventive measures, including:
                            - videos and social advertising about
                          vaccination and diagnostics of animals;
                            - digital information materials (brochures,
                          infographics);
                            - distribution of materials through online
                            platforms         and        interdepartmental
                            communication channels.
                              2.                            Organization of
                            targeted training events for users of the
                            information system for registration and
                            control of veterinary drugs on issues and
                            acquisition:
                            - control over the rational use of
                            antimicrobial drugs in order to prevent and
                            monitor antimicrobial resistance (AMR);
                            - acquisition of the main derivatives of the
                            information system (server, etc.);
                            - the role of veterinary services in the
                            surveillance system for zoonotic diseases in
                            the context of the "One Health" approach.
                            International exchange of experience in
                            implementing an information system for
                            regulating the circulation of veterinary drugs
                            in EU countries with progressive experience
                            in this area. Visit of Kazakhstani specialists.
                              3.                            Creation     and
                                                                                15
                                                implementation of a state information
                                                system for the regulation and circulation of
                                                veterinary drugs, aimed at providing a
                                                unified platform for managing data on
                                                veterinary drugs, traceability of veterinary
                                                measures, including prevention and
                                                response to zoonotic diseases.

 Ministry of Health                              1. A roundtable discussion was held on the
                                                development of regulatory mechanisms for
                                                interagency cooperation in planning,
                                                coordinating, and monitoring measures
                                                related to zoonotic diseases, antibiotic
                                                resistance, biosafety, and food safety.
                                                 2. Conducting a workshop to engage target
                                                communities and audiences to raise public
                                                awareness of animal-to-human infections
                                                within the framework of the "One Health"
                                                concept in Kazakhstan.
                                                 3. Organization and implementation of
                                                joint events by representatives of the
                                                Ministry of Health of the Republic of
                                                Kazakhstan, the Ministry of Agriculture of
                                                the Republic of Kazakhstan, and the Ministry
                                                of Economy and Natural Resources of the
                                                Republic of Kazakhstan, with distribution of
                                                booklets on the prevention of infections
                                                transmitted from animals to humans to
                                                target population groups.
                                                 4. Advanced training in the course “Basic
                                                program of applied epidemiology with the
                                                One Health approach ”.
                                                 5. Technical support and capacity building
                                                for epidemiological surveillance of priority
                                                zoonotic diseases
                                                diseases.


3.1 Marginalized/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups

    It is essential to understand whether the results and impacts of the Project may fall
disproportionately on disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups who often lack the
opportunity to voice their concerns or understand the Project's impacts. It is therefore important to
ensure that awareness raising and engagement with disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or
groups on pandemic prevention, food system resilience, and ecosystem health, in particular, is
tailored to the specificities, concerns, and cultural contexts of such groups or individuals, and to
ensure a full understanding of the project's activities and benefits. A person may be vulnerable
because of their origin, gender, age, health, economic and financial insecurity, disadvantaged status
in society (e.g. minorities or informal groups), dependence on others or on natural resources, etc.
                                                                                                   16
Special measures and participation support to vulnerable groups and individuals are often required.
Their awareness and contribution to the process should be commensurate with other stakeholders.

Under the Project, vulnerable or disadvantaged groups of the population include the following
categories of citizens:
    • elderly pensioners;
    • people with disabilities;
    • pregnant women, babies and children;
    • female-headed households and/or single mothers raising minor children;
    • large low-income families;
    • unemployed pool of labor;
    • children incarcerated from shelters and orphanages and people living in nursing homes;
    • stateless persons and refugees;
    • Migrants.

Consultation efforts with project-affected community groups will be carried out through specific
means and approaches, as appropriate. The methods of engagement for the project are described in
the following sections of this SEP..




                                                                                                 17
                                                                    Table 4.
                                Analysis and prioritization of stakeholder groups based on level of interest
                                                          and impact on the project*
                                                                                                                                     The
 Interested party                                                                                          Impact    of    the
                               Description            Sphere influences        Region interests                                  importance of the
                                                                                                             project
                                                                                                                                 interested party
                                                                                                                                       sides
                                                                I. Affected sides
Ministry of Ecology and   The          Ministry   Supervision, acting as the Improvement of field                           High
                                                                                                  Enhanced infrastructure
Natural Resources of      responsible       for   competent authority for operations and wildlife
                                                                                                  and operational capacity.
the     Republic     of   environmental           the implementation of      monitoring  through
Kazakhstan                protection policy       the benefit-sharing plans the procurement of
                                                  developed for the Project. the        necessary
                                                                             equipment.


The Committee for The Committee is                  Supervision,  as    the   Prevention of mass        Enhanced                High
Forestry and Wildlife of responsible for the policy competent authority for   saiga      die-offs  in   infrastructure      and
the Ministry of Ecology on the conservation and the implementation of         Kazakhstan, including     operational capacity.
and Natural Resources restoration of the saiga the benefit-sharing plans      an            emergency
of the Republic of population.                      developed    for    the   response protocol for
Kazakhstan.                                         Project.                  mass mortality events
                                                                              of saigas.




                                                                                                                                                     18
Ministry of Agriculture   Ministry responsible for Oversight of national          Maintenance      of        Benefits from legal High
                          agricultural management veterinary        policy,       operational                assessment,
                          policy.                  regulating the Project’s       activities     and         strengthening
                                                   impact on natural              compliance    with         laboratory     capacity,
                                                   resources.                     new         project        and          developing
                                                                                  standards.                 regulatory frameworks.


Committee            for The      Committee      is                               Maintenance         of Benefits     from   legal High
Veterinary Control and responsible for veterinary Oversight of national           operational activities assessment,
Supervision   of    the matters and the safety of veterinary      policy,         and compliance with strengthening laboratory
Ministry of Agriculture food products subject to regulating the Project’s         new project standards. capacity, and developing
of the Republic of veterinary and sanitary impact            on  natural                                 regulatory frameworks.
Kazakhstan               control and supervision. resources.


Ministry of Health        Responsible for policy and National sanitary rules One of the main                 Benefits from upgrading High
                          regulations in the field of and      public    health government                   and      utilizing     new
                          public health.              projects    related      to implementing               equipment, as well as
                                                      environmental impacts. agencies.                       enhancing skills through
                          Government laboratories Maintenance                  of The primary Project        Project-organized
                          conducting research and standards and adoption outcome                is     the   training. One of the
                          diagnostics in the field of of    new     operational strengthening           of   main          government
                          public health.              guidelines related to existing infrastructure          implementing agencies.
                                                      Project         activities. and      systems      to   The       key       Project
                                                                                  improve              the   outcome          is     the
                                                                                  prevention, detection,     strengthening            of
                                                                                  and     response      to   existing infrastructure
                                                                                  infectious diseases.       and systems to improve
                                                                                                             prevention, detection,
                                                                                                             and      response        to
                                                                                                             infectious diseases.

                                                                                                                                            19
Committee for Sanitary          The Committee is                                     Ensuring        Project One of the main
and      Epidemiological      responsible for public Public           laboratories   compliance with public government
Control of the Ministry       health        protection, conducting research and      health standards and implementing agencies.
of Health of the Republic     sanitary              and diagnostics in public        policies.                The primary Project
of Kazakhstan                 epidemiological      well- health                      Benefits          from outcome          is    the
                              being of the population, Responsible for public        upgrading and utilizing strengthening of existing
                              control and supervision health           protection,   new equipment, as infrastructure              and
                              of compliance with sanitary                     and    well as enhancing skills systems to improve
                              requirements               epidemiological     well-   through        Project- prevention, detection,
                              established by technical being of the population,      organized     training. and       response     to
                              regulations           and control and supervision                               infectious diseases.
                              normative documents, of compliance with
                              as well as food safety. requirements
                                                         established by technical
                            Government laboratories regulations               and
                            conducting research and normative documents,
                            diagnostics in the field of and       food     safety.
                            public health


                             Responsible          for                          Maintenance         of        Implementing         new Low
Akimats of the Regions                                Implementation        of
                            agricultural       policy                          operational activities        design         standards.
                                                      agricultural
                            management and natural                             and compliance with           Improving the lives of
                                                      development, rational
                            resource conservation at                           new Project standards.        local residents.
                                                      use of natural resources
                            the regional level                                 Implementation      of
                                                      and       environmental
                                                                               new Project standards
                                                      protection.
                                                                               and improvement of
                                                                               local        community
                                                                               livelihoods.




                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                II. Others stakeholders
World Bank               International     financial Organization of project Ensuring transparency        Greater development
                         institution,                financing      aimed     at and accountability and   success and economic
                          financing the project      successful         project positive social and       stability. The World
                                                     implementation.             environmental results.   Bank would enjoy solid
                                                                                                          returns on investment,   High
                                                     Provides technical and
                                                     advisory support during                              both financially and
                                                                                                          socioeconomically,
                                                     project implementation.
                                                                                                          which would bring
                                                                                                          about lasting change..




RSE on the Right of      The Institute of Zoology The        Institute    has   Researching methods       Dissemination of gained High
Economic                 conducts     fundamental extensive        experience   to enhance landscape      knowledge, with Institute
Management               and applied zoological studying                  the   resilience to zoonotic    specialists participating in
“Institute of Zoology”   research necessary for anthropogenic factors of        diseases           and    the      Project’s     field
of     the     Science   the         conservation, human-wildlife               organizing an effective   research.
Committee of the         reproduction,     control, interaction.                system for monitoring
Ministry of Science      and sustainable use of                                 and         preventing
and Higher Education     Kazakhstan’s wildlife.                                 zoonotic outbreaks.
of the Republic of
Kazakhstan




                                                                                                                                          21
NGO          “Kazakhstan ACBK strives for the          A priority area is        Ensuring transparency                           Medium
Association          for sustainable conservation      knowledge      exchange   and engaging the Participation of        non-
Biodiversity             of wildlife diversity based   with stakeholders in      public to achieve governmental
Conservation” (ACBK)     on scientific principles,     government, the private   Project objectives.   organizations.
                         developing partnerships       sector,   communities,
                         with      national      and   and education.
                         international
                         organizations.




The              Regional CAREC (Central Asia A priority area is                 Ensuring transparency Participation of   non- Medium
Environmental Centre for Regional Environmental knowledge         exchange       and engaging the governmental
Central Asia (CAREC)      Centre) is an international with stakeholders in       public to achieve organizations.
                          organization promoting government, the private         Project objectives.
                          regional       cooperation sector,   communities,
                          among Central Asian and education.
                          countries in the field of
                          environmental protection
                          and             sustainable
                          development.




Marginalized/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups




                                                                                                                                          22
                                                                                                  Improved health and
                                                    Inclusive outcomes and Ensuring protection of veterinary services in
Marginalized/Vulnerabl Marginalized/Vulnerabl
                                                    stronger     community their rights and needs country. Project support.
e Individuals or Groups e Individuals or Groups                                                                             Low
                                                    support..              for access



For the purpose of this analysis:
    • Influence: a social group can significantly influence the process of project implementation;
    • Ownership: a social group or individuals not necessarily directly affected by the Project may or may not have an interest in the Project;
    • Impact: the implementation of the Project may have a significant impact on a certain social group (stakeholders).




                                                                                                                                                  23
4. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM

4.1 Goal and Timeframe of Stakeholder Engagement Program

This Stakeholder Engagement Program has been designed to provide a meaningful platform
for productive engagement with potentially affected stakeholders and others interested in
the One Health outcomes for pandemic prevention, food system resilience, and ecosystem
health in Central Asia. Meaningful stakeholder engagement throughout the project life-cycle
will contribute to:
    • Solicit feedback for Project design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation;
    • Clarify project objectives, scope and management of expectations;
    • Assess and mitigate environmental and social risks of the project;
    • Improve project outcomes and benefits;
    • Engage and foster collaboration;
    • Disseminate accurate information/materials on the Project;
    • Receive and address Project grievances.

Adequate consultation with stakeholders will require timely and advance planning. To ensure
that information is accessible to stakeholders and that different groups are adequately
represented and engaged in the process, the One Health approach will use various methods
based on needs assessments. Methods of engagement are listed in Table 5 below..

Table 5: One Health Stakeholder Engagement Modalities for Pandemic Prevention, Food
Systems Resilience, and Ecosystem Health in Central Asia
                                                                  Periodicity/
      Engagement            Description      and
                                                  Target audience Time frame
    methods                application
     Websites         Project Appraisal Document All                     Within 2 months
                      (PAD)       and       Project stakeholders         from the date of
                      Implementation       Manual                        entry into force
                      (PIM), ESCP and SEP                               Validity of the
                      will be published on official                     Grant Agreement
                      websites o f m i n i s t r i e s
                      a n d partner agencies and
                      the World Bank
                                                                        Frequency/Tempo
     Engagement             Description        and
                                                     Target audience    rary
    methods                 application
                                                                        framework




                                                                                         24
Communication by Dissemination of reliable             Government          Quarterly
phone and instant Project information among            officials,   NGOs,
messengers,          government           officials,   public associations
correspondence by persons,           organizations,    and
email and in writing departments and companies,            partners for
                     and invitation of                     development
                     interested
                     parties to meetings. .


  Internet/ Digital Usage                              Project                Within 3 months
media               Official websites of partner       participants and       from the date of
                    and implementing ministries        others                 entry into force
                    and      departments         to    Stakeholders with     the validity of the
                    disseminate            various     access to online       Grant
                    information and updates            resources              Agreement, and
                    about the overall project,                                throughout the
                    impact assessment and                                     project
                    impact          management                                implementation
                    processes                      ,                          period
                    procurement/tendering,
                    employment opportunities,
                    as well as about the project's
                    interaction activities with the
                    public.


 Interview            This method will be used to      Vulnerable             Within 2 months
                      collect opinions on the          individuals, public    from the date of
                      impact of the project and its    organizations,         entry into
                      solutions.                       associations, NGO     force       Grant
                                                       etc.                   Agreement, and
                                                                              throughout the
                                                                              entire period of
                                                                              Project
                                                                              implementation

    Seminars          This channel will be used for:   Government             Within 2 months
                      (i)       presenting             organizations,         from the date of
                      information about the            NGO,                   entry into
                      project to a group of            Public                force       Grant
                      stakeholders;                    organizations,         Agreement, and
                      (ii)     provision to a group    industry               throughout the
                      of               stakeholders    associations           entire period of
                      opportunities to express                                Project
                      one's views;                                            implementation

                                                                                              25
                      (iii) use of joint tasks to
                      facilitate group discussions,
                      conduct       brainstorming,
                      information analysis and
                      development                of
                      recommendations          and
                      strategies; and
                      Recording answers.


4.2 Proposed Disclosure Strategy

Stakeholder engagement under the One Health program will follow a standard project
management cycle, which will include: (i) Preparation and Design Phase; (ii) Implementation
phase; (iii) Monitoring stage; and (iv) Completion and Evaluation Phase. The disclosure
strategy is presented in Table 6 below.




                                                                                         26
 Table 6. One Health Disclosure Strategy
                         List of information          The proposed
 Project Stage                                                            Target stakeholders       Topic consultations     Responsibility
                        subject to disclosure         methodology
Stage             ESCP, SEP                     Official websites       Stakeholders on          Social and ecological            PIU
preparation or                                                          republican and           management,
design                                                                  at the regional level.   procurement, interaction
                                                                                                 with
                                                                                                 interested parties.
                                                Seminars                Stakeholders on          Concept project, method PIU, MENR, MoA,
                                                                        republican and           of selecting communities-     MoH
                                                                        at the regional level.   beneficiaries, benefits,
                                                                                                 impact
                                                Public discussions and Stakeholders on           Concept project, method State Registration,
                                                consultations     with republican and            of selecting communities- Cadastre and
                                                affected parties       at the regional level.    beneficiaries,              Cartography
                                                parties                                          benefits, impact           Department,
                                                                                                                          Ministry of Ecology
                                                                                                                             and Natural
                                                                                                                              Resources,
                                                                                                                              Ministry of
                                                                                                                             Agriculture,
                                                                                                                                 MoH




                                                                                                                                             27
Implementation     Social and Environmental Official websites           Stakeholders on          Benefits            And PIU, MENR, MoA,
stage              Management Plan (SEMP),                              republican and           consequences of projects      MoH
                   Human                Resources                       at the regional level.   (safety, MPRP, problems
                   Management          Procedure,                                                gender-based violence
                   Occupational Health and                                                       and their
                   Safety     Plan,    Emergency                                                 mitigation)
                   Preparedness and Response.
                   Project     Monitoring     and
                   Compliance Reporting
                   Security labor and technology
                   security,           emergency
                   preparedness and response
                   on them
                   Monitoring       project   and
                   report on
                   compliance measures
                   precautions
Monitoring stage   Quarterly      and       annual Official websites of Stakeholders on          Effectiveness of the PIU, MENR, MoA,
                   performance reports             participating        republican and           Grievance        Redress   MoH
                                                   government agencies at the regional level.    Mechanism         (GRM),
                   Social and environmental                                                      safety, and education on
                   audit reports                                                                 gender-based violence

                  Updated information about
                  activities
                  project
Stage             Project Completion Report Institutional reports All                            Project Results        PIU, MENR, MoA,
completion    and                           on completion         stakeholders                                                MoH
evaluations


                                                                                                                                      28
4.3 Proposed strategy for listening to the voices of vulnerable groups

Inclusiveness will guide stakeholder engagement, particularly in relation to vulnerable individuals
and groups. Where vulnerability may result in unwillingness or physical inability to participate in
large public gatherings, the project will hold separate small group discussions with them in an
easily accessible location. Thus, the project will reach out to groups that may under normal
circumstances be underrepresented in community town halls. Some strategies to adopt to reach
out to these groups include:

   •   Identify the leaders of vulnerable and marginalized groups to reach out.
   •   Maintain a database of marginalized groups through existing industry associations, e.g.
       Association of Persons with Disabilities, Society of the Deaf and Dumb, etc.
   •   Leverage existing health and environmental projects that include vulnerable groups that
       overlap with this project, to use their systems to identify and engage with them.
   •   Involve community leaders, civil society organizations, and NGOs working with vulnerable
       groups.
   •   Organize face-to-face focus group discussions with these groups.




                                                                                                 29
5. RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLANNED
   ACTIVITIES UNDER THE SEP

5.1 Resources required

The One Health approach in Kazakhstan will be implemented in three sectors, i.e. agriculture,
environment and health, and the establishment of the National One Health Coordination
Structure (NOHCS) will be supported.
The project will be financed by a grant from the Pandemic Fund (as the part of the multi-country
activity "One Health Pandemic Preparedness and Response" in Central Asia, for which the World
Bank is designated as the implementing agency and Kazakhstan as the beneficiary).

The following organizations were identified as implementing entities:
   A. Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources;
   B. Ministry of Agriculture;
   C. Ministry of Health;
   D. Group project implementation at the Ministry Ecology and natural resources .
   E. National coordination structure "One Health";
Table 7 provides an overview of the budgetary allocations for the implementation of the SEP.
         Table 7. Budget allocation summary table, USD
 Stakeholder engagement activities Cost per unit,      Quantity           Total Cost (US$) *
                                      (US$)


 Environmental Specialist             1,000               24 months          24,000
 (2 years, USD )
 Social Work Specialist (2 years, USD) 1,000              24 months          24,000
 Travel expenses of SE personnel 1 000                    10                 10 000
 (expenses per year) for attracting
 interested sides
 Total:                                                                      58 000
*Estimated Amount

5.2 Project Implementation Arrangements

To achieve the objectives of the Project, the implementing agencies will carry out the following
activities with relevant ministries and stakeholders in the country:

   A. Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources (MENR): The proposed measures are aimed at
      improving field operations and monitoring the health of wild animals through the
      procurement of necessary equipment. These measures include:
          • Procurement of communication and surveillance equipment for environmental
            enterprises and institutions;
          • Procurement of equipment for treatment and testing of animals;

                                                                                               30
       • Establishing a National Center for Saiga Ecological and Epizootic Monitoring in
         Kazakhstan.

B. Ministry of Agriculture (MOA):                     The proposed         measures are
   aimed at enhancing the capacity of the State Veterinary Service to combat infectious
   animal diseases through legislative assessment, improvement of laboratory capacity, and
   development of regulations. These measures include:
       • Assessment of the legislative framework;
       • Revision of legislative documents;
       • The creation and implementation of a state information system for the regulation
         and circulation of veterinary drugs, aimed at providing a unified platform for
         managing data on veterinary drugs and the traceability of veterinary measures,
         including the prevention of and response to zoonotic diseases.

C. Ministry of Health (MoH): The proposed measures will be aimed at strengthening the
   epidemiological capacity supervision for priority zoonotic diseases (i.e. brucellosis,
   echinococcosis and rabies) and improved diagnostic coverage And quality in existing
   laboratories within public healthcare. The proposed activities are aimed at modernizing the
   system supported by the COVID-19 Response Project, i.e., the automated data
   management for sanitary and epidemiological surveillance (ADSES) and the diagnostic
   capacity in microbiology and serology laboratories (which were supported by the Avian
   Influenza Project). The activities include:
       • UV-VIS spectrophotometer Cary 60, Cary WinUV software, 10 mm quartz cuvette 3.5
         ml (2 pcs/pack), workstation ; computer, monitor, printer, uninterruptible power
         supply.
       • Purchase of materials and instruments for measuring the percentage concentration
         of sucrose in transparent solutions (sucrose in syrups and drinks; glucose, fructose,
         maltose, lactose in solutions)

D. National O n e H e a l t h Coordination Structure: Project
   One Health will support Kazakhstan in creation and implementation of the National One
   Health Coordination Structure (NOHCS). The main goal of the NOHCS is to promote
   effective intersectoral coordination at the country (national) level. The NOHCS will include
   representatives from the three sectoral ministries participating in the One Health program
   (health, agriculture, and environment).




                                                                                             31
6. GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM (GRM )

The primary objective of the Grievance Mechanism (GRM) is to facilitate the timely and efficient
resolution of grievances and grievances related to the implementation of the Project, so that the
outcome is satisfactory to all stakeholders. Specifically, it provides for a transparent and robust
process to achieve fair, efficient and sustainable outcomes. It also builds trust and cooperation.
As integral components of a broader community consultation process facilitating the
implementation of corrective actions.

In in particular, GRM:
    • provides affected people with the opportunity to file a complaint or resolve any dispute
        that may arise during the implementation of activities under the project;
    • ensures that appropriate and mutually acceptable corrective measures are identified and
        implemented to the satisfaction of the complaining party;allows you to avoid the need to
        go to court.

6.1 Grievance Mechanism in Kazakhstan

Basic provisions and regulatory framework:

The Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan “On the procedure for considering appeals from individuals
and legal entities” (dated January 12, 2007, No. 221-III) establishes general rules for appealing to
state and quasi-state structures.

The Administrative Procedure Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan (APC) regulates appeals against
administrative acts and actions (inactions) of government agencies. A preliminary assessment of
complaint systems in Kazakhstan revealed that the country has effective mechanisms accessible
to anyone for filing and appealing any actions or inactions of officials, government agencies, local
governments, and public associations.

The project's grievance mechanism builds on the existing grievance mechanisms in Kazakhstan to
ensure continued consistency and sustainability of institutional and grievance mechanisms.

Complaints and appeals are submitted in writing or electronically (including through the e-Otinish
portal).
Complaints are subject to mandatory registration, and the response must be substantiated,
reasoned, and contain references to Kazakhstan legislation and facts supporting or refuting the
arguments. If the complainant disagrees with the decision, they may appeal it to a higher authority
or to the court.

The project monitors communication channels for compliance with required standards, evaluates
performance, collects data on received complaints and appeals, tracks the actions taken on these
appeals, prepares an overview as part of quarterly reports, and proposes measures to further
improve the work of the Ministry of Justice.
The public and stakeholders can send their complaints and appeals on issues related to the
implementation of the Project to the PIU system under the Ministry of Ecology and Natural


                                                                                                  32
Resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the World Bank system, the Prosecutor's Office, the
Presidential Administration, or the relevant government agencies, using various communication
channels (hotline, the ability to submit complaints online, in writing, and by telephone), using the
communication channels of the PIU or the World Bank.

This ORM contains such a system and the necessary chain of action (including staffing) to address
grievances—from registration, triage and processing, acknowledgement and follow-up, to
verification and action, and eventual feedback. In emergency situations, to encourage the
proactive participation of beneficiaries, communications messages will be made available via mass
media, social media, focus groups, and other face-to-face and remote communication channels to
reach the public. As part of awareness-raising campaigns, the PIU will ensure that staff are
adequately trained and have the necessary information and experience to conduct telephone
consultations and receive feedback on issues related to the One Health program.

The grievance redress chain consists of receipt of the complaint, registration, triaging, processing,
confirmation, follow-up, verification, action or forwarding, and feedback – all are described in this
GRM.

To receive grievances, the project will use the following systems and channels (hotline, online,
writing, mail, and telephone grievance channels) to ensure that all project-related information is
disseminated and that complaints and responses are adequately tracked, followed up and
resolved.

All complaints received by PIU, WB staff, and other complaints input and collection channels are
recorded in a log where the type of complaint, details of the complaint, people contact
information, deadline, and agreed actions are recorded.

Complaints will be forwarded to the relevant PIU complaints officers for triage and a decision on
further processing and follow-up. If the complaint is within the jurisdiction of another organization
or ministry (e.g. migration, travel, compensation, etc.), the complaint will be forwarded
accordingly. The actions taken or response completed are logged.

The Project supports the national GRM systems within the strict framework of World Bank
operations                                   in                                    Kazakhstan.
The Project collects data from the GRMs for inclusion in the quarterly Project Implementation
Progress Report submitted to the World Bank.

Channels for accessing One Health information and submitting complaints to PIU include:
   • Electronic mail: klhjm @ ecogeo . gov . kz
   • Oral or written complaints, received V in the course workers meetings And personal
      reception;
   • Incoming correspondence, delivered by courier V GRP at the address Republic of
      Kazakhstan, Astana, Mangilik El Avenue 30, Astana Partners Business Center, office 219 ;
   • Incoming correspondence, received By mail: Republic of Kazakhstan, Astana, Mangilik El
      Avenue, Building 8, Entrance 15, administrative building “House of Ministries”, Committee
      for Forestry and Wildlife;
   • Contact number phone public reception of the PIU: +7 776 675 0988 ;

                                                                                                   33
The World Bank's Grievance Redress System should:
   • Email: grievances@worldbank.org
   • Fax: +1.202.614.7313
   • Incoming correspondence , received By mail : The World Bank, Grievance Redress
      Service, MSN MC10-1018, 1818 H Street Northwest, Washington, DC 20433, USA

Anonymous complaints are also accepted through any of these channels. In addition, there is a
dedicated Complaint Window for Gender Based Violence (GBV) and all complaints must be treated
separately and kept completely confidential.

6.2 Receipt of complaints

If a project-related complaint is received, the following points will be identified:
     • Complaint type;
     • Category of complaint;
     • People responsible for investigating and resolving the complaint;
     • Timeline for complaint review;
     • Concerted action.

Once the complaint type is identified, the responsible party records the details in the appropriate
correspondence log. The person submitting the complaint will be notified by phone or email of
the following:
     • Full name of the provider to whom the complaint was directed;
     • Review period (no more than 30 days from the date of registration, in case of emergency,
        the relevant measures are taken within 5 working days);
     • The relevant timing and actions will be determined in accordance with the complaints
        handling instructions of the PIU.
Notice. The notification is registered in the journal of outgoing correspondence. The complaints
officer at the PIU will ensure that the complaint is handled properly.
If the person who filed the complaint is not satisfied with the decision made as a result of the
consideration of the complaint, he/she has the right to appeal such decision. The appeal will be
reviewed by the Project Manager/Coordinator or PIU specialists. Following review, if the
citizen/beneficiary is not satisfied with the decision, they have the right to appeal the decision or
to go to the grievance redress system as outlined in Section 5.1 of this Plan. In addition, there will
be a dedicated window for Complaint Committees to consider sexual exploitation and
abuse/harassment (SEA/SH). To ensure effective operation, the PIU contributes to: (i) raising
awareness among workers and communities; (ii) ensure that relevant stakeholders understand
what can and should not be done; (iii) how to report SEA/SH; and (iv) developing protocols to
handle issues, taking into account the sensitivity of the communication and the confidentiality of
affected parties.

6.3 Monitoring and Reporting of Grievances
Contact points for complaints to the PIU at Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources of
Kazakhstan and the WB are responsible for:
    • collection and analysis of qualitative data received from the Grievance Specialist on the
      number, content, and status of complaints and upload it into the project's database;


                                                                                                    34
   •   monitoring of unresolved issues and proposed actions to resolve them;
   •   preparation quarterly reports on GRM mechanisms for distribution to the World Bank.

The quarterly reports to the World Bank will include a section related to the IJR with the following
updates:
   • Status of GRM Implementation (Procedures, Training, Awareness Campaigns
   • population, budgeting, etc.);
   • qualitative data on the number of complaints received (applications, suggestions,
      complaints, requests, positive feedback), with separate indication of complaints,
      and the number of grievances resolved, if any;
   • quantitative data on the type and responses provided, questions submitted and any
      outstanding complaints;
   • the level of satisfaction with the measures taken (response);
   • corrective actions taken.

6.4 The World Bank's Grievance Redress System
Communities and individuals who believe that they have been adversely affected by a World Bank-
supported project may also submit complaints directly to the Bank through the Bank's Grievance
Redress Service (GRS) (http://projects-beta.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-
and-services/grievance-redress-service ). Complaints can be submitted in English, Kazakh, or
Russian, although non-English complaints will require processing Extra time. Complaints may be
submitted to the GRS through the following channels:
    • By e-mail: grievances@worldbank.org
    • By fax: +1.202.614.7313
    • Mail: The World Bank, Grievance Redress Service, MSN MC10-1018, 1818 H Street
       Northwest, Washington, DC 20433, USA

Complaints must clearly state the adverse impact(s) alleged to have occurred due to the
implementation of the World Bank-supported project. If possible, it is necessary to attach existing
documents and correspondence. The person submitting the complaint may also indicate the
desired outcome. Finally, the complainant(s) or their designated representatives and contact
information should be identified in the complaint. Complaints submitted through the GRS are
dealt with on a prompt basis, allowing for a quick response to project-related concerns.

In addition, project-affected communities and individuals may submit complaints to the World
Bank's independent Inspection which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a
result of World Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be
submitted to the Third Inspection at any time after the World Bank has been notified of the
concerns. and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on
how to submit a complaint to the World Bank's independent inspection, please go to:
www.inspectionpanel.org.




                                                                                                  35
SCHEME PROJECT GRM PROCESS

Step 1. Submitting a Complaint (Day 0-1)

Step 2. Registration and Confirmation (within 3 days)

Step 3. Sorting and distribution (Day 3-5)

Step 4. Investigation and Corrective Action (Day 5-20)

Step 5. Complainant Response and Feedback (Day 20-30)

Step 6. Appeal/aggravation (immediately after decision, if not successful)

Step 7. Closure and Reporting (World Bank quarterly summary and reporting)

Step by step description process

Step 1 - Submit a Complaint (Day 0-1)

   •   Complaints were received via a hotline, email, face-to-face, mailbox, or World Bank
       channels.
   •   Those who are illiterate or handicapped will be supported by staff support.
   •   Anonymous complaints and complaints related to gender-related violence
       gender/sexual exploitation/sexual harassment are received and treated confidentially.

Step 2 – Registration and Confirmation (within 3 days)

   •   The PIU registers the complaint in a logbook/database.
   •   The applicant is informed (by phone, e-mail or letter) of:
          o Contact Person in PIU,
          o Maximum processing time (30 days),
          o Special Fast Track Emergency Response (within 5 working days).

Step 3 – Sorting and Distribution (Day 3-5)

   •   Classification of grievances (minor, serious, gender-based violence, compensation, etc.).
   •   The responsibility is assigned to the PIU person concerned or delegated to the competent
       authority.

Step 4 – Investigation and Corrective Action (Day 5-20)

   •   Facts are checked and, if necessary, field visits are carried out.
   •   The PIU consults with affected individuals and stakeholders.
   •   Corrective actions are prepared and implemented.
   •   Urgent cases are resolved within 5 working days.


                                                                                              36
Step 5 – Response and Feedback (Day 20-30)

   •   The applicant receives an official response in writing or orally.
   •   The decision includes a corrective action, a timeline, or a reason for the rejection.
   •   The record is updated in the complaints handling log.

Step 6 – Appeal            / Escalation (immediately after          acceptance decisions
     In in case of dissatisfaction)
   • Escalate to:
         o PIU Manager/Project Coordinator,
         o MENR,
         o National complaints bodies (prosecution, ombudsman), or
         o World Bank Grievance Redress Service (GRS) / Inspection Panel.

Step 7 – Closing and Reporting (quarterly summary and reporting by the World Bank)

   •   Resolved complaints are marked as closed in the system.
   •   All inquiries are aggregated and analyzed for a quarterly report to the World Bank covering:
            o Number and type of complaints,
            o Resolution,
            o Lessons learned
            o Satisfaction level




                                                                                                 37
7. MONITORING AND REPORTING

Monitoring and tracking stakeholder engagement is important to ensure effective ongoing
engagement and follow-up, as well as to minimize omissions and monitor the implementation of
important commitments. The Environment and Pollution Management Program will maintain a
Stakeholder Engagement Log that records all ongoing or planned stakeholder engagements. The
engagement log will include information on the location and dates of meetings, workshops, and
discussions, as well as a description of the project-affected parties and other stakeholders
consulted. The monitoring reports provided to the PIU and the Bank will include a log of
stakeholder engagement and feedback from the GRM. This could also include, for example, how
the project ministry responded to the concerns raised, how those responses were communicated
to those consulted, details of outstanding issues and any envisaged follow-up actions. Annual
reporting on the SEP will form part of the Project Monitoring Report.

The project will also develop an evaluation form to assess the effectiveness of each formal
engagement process. The questions will be tailored to the appropriate audience.

7.1 Involvement interested sides V activity for monitoring
As stated earlier, the Project Implementation Unit will oversee the implementation SEP. Specialist
in surrounding environment And social questions, together
The Project Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist will monitor the implementation of this
Stakeholder Engagement Plan in accordance with the requirements of the legal agreement,
including the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan. (ESCP). Team will track and document
any commitments or actions agreed upon during consultations, including changes resulting from
changes in the project design or SEP.

Monitoring data from beneficiaries, enterprises, associations, and organizations, as well as
training service providers, will be collected through self-reporting, according to a schedule, and
using standardized forms and procedures. Information from these beneficiaries will also be
collected during monitoring visits by staff from implementing ministries and agencies.

7.2 Reporting before in groups interested sides

Reports to stakeholder groups will be produced in a variety of ways, including annual national
meetings by review efficiency activities all implementing agencies. Through planned
communication channels, the project's results will be disseminated among stakeholders at the
national and subnational levels.




                                                                                                38
8. ANNEXES

ANNEX 1. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITY LOG


              Interest groups                                              Key results and
                                       Location and   place Target                           Quantity   participants   Link on the
 № Item       sides             Date                                       actions
                                       conducting           interactions                     (men/women)                 recording
 No.




                                                                                                                                39
ANNEX 2. FORMAT COMPILATIONS PROTOCOL CONSULTATIONS WITH STAKEHOLDERS

PROTOCOL CONSULTATIONS WITH INTERESTED PARTIES

A       Name project:
        Name         of the interested
B
        party
        sides:
 Note: This document is a working summary of the main facts recorded during
 consultations/interviews with key informants and should not be considered a formal record.
 Therefore, it is intentionally not exhaustive. or chronological. His target - fix important
 information/ reviews And Not intended For official consideration or statements.

        Main details:
C       Location:
        Date:
        Present (List (attached):
D
        Full name                        Job title
        Target consultations
E


        Discussed key moments:




F       Main problems And offers, expressed interested parties:




                                                                                          40
ANNEX 3. FORM SUBMISSIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS COMPLAINTS

 FORM SUBMISSIONS COMPLAINTS
  Registration number complaints
  PART FIRST
  DATA ABOUT COMPLAINT
  (To be filled in applicant OR department consideration complaints V case complaints,
  sent by mail and phone calls)
  1.1 Information O illegal activities
  Name                         of the alleged
  The offender
  Address
  No. phone
  Address electronic mail
  1.2 Brief description complaints (at necessity attach additional sheet)




  1.3 Information O supposed source
  Type of activity
  Location (please provide sketch)
  Date detection violating actions
  Character violations (check NOT REALLY)       - Constant Yes [ ] No[ ]
                                                -    Intermittent      /    Turns   on
                                                     and off Yes[ ] No[ ]
  1.4 Story messages O complaints
  Received whether complaints previously? (YES
  or NO)
  IN GRP? (YES or NO)
  If Yes, please indicate following
  Was whether report compiled orally? (YES or
  not)
  Date compilation report
  IN Which the office reported                 Head office [ ]
                                               Regional office [ ]
  1.5 Intelligence O applicants
  Name
  Address
  No. phone
  No. fax
  Signature
  Time
  Date
  Address electronic mail
  1.6 You demand whether You, to yours the
  personality remained confidential? ( YES or
  NO )

                                                                                         41
1.7 How You do you want, to With you did you Email [ ] Telephone [ ]
get in touch?
1.8 Employee By reception complaints GRP/Department complaints
Employee's name

Signature
Date
PART SECOND
BROADCAST COMPLAINTS FOR CONDUCTING INVESTIGATIONS
(Will designed official persons GRP)
2.1 Registration complaints
Registered whether complaint (YES or NO)
If Yes, please indicate registration number
2.2 Direction V corresponding department/region (check)
     ➢ Surrounding Wednesday buildings [ ]
     ➢ Natural resources [ ]
     ➢ Mining And other industry [ ]
     ➢ Inspection [ ]
     ➢ Regional employees programs [ ]
     ➢ Quality surrounding Wednesday [ ]
PART THIRD
BRIEF REPORT ABOUT INVESTIGATION COMPLAINTS
(Must be filled (investigator)
3.1 Examination information O supposed offender
Name          (registered
              type)
activities/responsible face)
No. phone
No. fax
Address electronic mail
3.2 OBSERVATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
3.2.1 Illegal activity
3.2.2      Determining         the location (mark) ➢ Residential [ ]
by GPS                                             ➢ Commercial [ ]
                                                   ➢ Industrial [ ]
                                                   ➢ Mixed [ ]
3.2.3 Type pollution (mark)                        ➢ Noise [ ]
                                                   ➢ Dust/solid particles/smoke [ ]
                                                   ➢ Water [ ]
                                                   ➢ Degradation lands [ ]
                                                   ➢ Smell [ ]
3.2.4 Source/reasons                               ➢ Incorrect location [ ]
                                                   ➢ Poor
                                                                                      environm
                                                  ental management practices [ ]
                                                ➢ Other(s), indicate




                                                                                                 42
3.2.5 Potential         impact   on ➢   Immediate [ ]
public health (check)               ➢   Short [ ]
                                    ➢   Long-term [ ]
                                    ➢   Other(s), indicate




                                                             43
       9. MINUTES OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTATIONS

                                MINUTES OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTATIONS

       Project Title:                       «Strengthening Zoonotic Disease Surveillance Capacity under the One
А
                                            Health Initiative».

       Stakeholder Title:                      Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan
B
                                              Project Implementation Unit
                                              Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Kazakhstan
                                              Ministry of Health of the Republic of Kazakhstan
                                              Akimats of the Regions and their Structural Subdivisions
                                              Forestry and Wildlife Committee of the Ministry of Ecology and Natural
                                              Resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan
                                              Committee for Veterinary Control and Supervision of the Ministry of
                                              Agriculture of the Republic of Kazakhstan
                                              Sanitary and Epidemiological Control Committee of the Ministry of Health
                                              of the Republic of Kazakhstan
Note: This document represents a working summary of the main facts recorded during consultations/interviews with
key informants and should not be considered an official protocol. Therefore, it is intentionally neither exhaustive nor
chronological. Its purpose is to capture key information/feedback and it is not intended for formal review or approval.

       Basic details:                       Discussion of the key project documents:
                                                1. Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP);
C                                               2. Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).

       Location:                            Republic of Kazakhstan, Astana

       Date:                                February 20, 2026
       Participants: The list is attached (Annex 1)
D
       Full Name
       Purpose of Consultation:
E     1. Presentation of the project to stakeholders
      2.Disclosure of information about the project
      3.Presentation of the ESCP and SEP
      4.Obtaining feedback from stakeholders on project implementation
       Key points discussed: The agenda is attached.
      1. The “One Health” Project
      2. ESCP
      3.SEP
      4. GRM
      Key concern and suggestion expressed by Stakeholders:




                                                                                                            44
    The Head of the Project Implementation Unit, E.K. Muratov, welcomed all participants of the consultations and
    presented the agenda.
F   The Environmental Specialist, D.B. Dukenbayev, delivered a presentation on the main objectives of the project
    and the contents of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and the Stakeholder Engagement
    Plan (SEP).
    V.V. Gromov, Advisor to the General Director of the RSE on the Right of Economic Management “Institute of
    Zoology” of the Science Committee of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of
    Kazakhstan, proposed including the following organizations in the list of other stakeholders:
         • RSE on the Right of Economic Management “Institute of Zoology” of the Science Committee of the
            Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan;
         • Hunting farms;
         • Hunters’ and Fishers’ associations;
         • Hunters.
    All proposals were taken into account in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).




                                                                                                      45
9.1 List of Participants in the Discussion of the ESCP and SEP

From the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources:
1. Bakytzhan Akbarovich Isakhaev – Chief Expert, Wildlife and Hunting
Management Department, Committee of Forestry and Wildlife.

From the Ministry of Agriculture:
2. Erlan Yerkinovich Yeginbaev – Head of the Biological Safety Department,
Committee for Veterinary Control and Supervision.
3. Leyla Simbaevna Ansabaeva – Head of the Veterinary Drugs Control
Department, Committee for Veterinary Control and Supervision.
4. Saltanat Nurlanovna Taurbaeva – Chief Specialist, Biological Safety
Department, Committee for Veterinary Control and Supervision.

From the Ministry of Health of the Republic of Kazakhstan:
5. Manar Asyrovna Smagul – Deputy Chairperson of the Board, RSE on the Right
of Economic Management “National Center for Public Health”.
6. Albina Yerbolatovna Utemuratova – Head of the Department for Control of
особо dangerous infections (especially dangerous infections).
7. Arai Rymgalievna Zekenova – Chief Expert, Department of Epidemiological
Control of Infectious Diseases.
8. Dinara Bekzatovna Omarova – Chief Expert, Department for Control of
Infectious Diseases.
9. Laura Islambekovna Akisheva – Chief Expert, Department of Epidemiological
Surveillance of особо dangerous infections and Biosafety.

From the World Bank:
10. Maman Reimov – Social Development Specialist (Safeguards).
11. Zhuldyz Zhurumbetova – Senior Environmental Specialist.

From Non-Governmental and Non-Profit Organizations:
12. Vitaliy Viktorovich Gromov – Advisor to the Director General, RSE on the
Right of Economic Management “Institute of Zoology”, Committee of Science,
Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
13. Sergey Lvovich Sklyarenko – Director for Science, Kazakhstan Association for
the Conservation of Biodiversity (ACBK).
14. Askar Orazbaevich Abdrakhmanov – Director, Corporate Fund “Saiga
Conservation and Development”.
15. Almat Serikbaevich Aubakirov – Executive Director, Association of Legal
Entities “Meat and Dairy Union of Kazakhstan”.

                                                                              46
From the Project Implementation Unit:
16. Erlan Kurmanovich Muratov – Head of the Project Implementation Group.
17. Ulan Zeynollinovich Abzhanov – Technical Consultant, Project
Implementation Group.
18. Duman Bakhitzhanovich Dukenbaev – Social and Environmental Specialist.
19. Aidana Askarovna Orazbekova – Fiduciary Specialist.
20. Anel Ruslanovna Altina – Consultant on Specially Protected Natural Areas.

Other Participants:
21. Territorial Inspections of Forestry and Wildlife – 17 regions.
22. Departments of Natural Resources and Environmental Management – 17
regions.




                                                                           47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
10.   REPORT ON STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS

      On February 20, 2026, in accordance with the World Bank procedures
under the Project “Strengthening Zoonotic Disease Surveillance Capacity within
the One Health Initiative”, public consultations with stakeholders were held.
      The online meeting was organized to discuss the key project documents:
   1. Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP);
   2. Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).
      During the discussion, the Environmental and Social Specialist,
Dukenbayev D. B., delivered a presentation on the ESCP and SEP.
     Following the discussion, V. V. Gromov, Advisor to the General Director of
the RSE on the Right of Economic Management “Institute of Zoology” of the
Science Committee of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the
Republic of Kazakhstan, proposed including the following organizations in the list
of other stakeholders:
   • RSE on the Right of Economic Management “Institute of Zoology” of the
      Science Committee of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the
      Republic of Kazakhstan;
   • Hunting farms;
   • Associations of hunters and fishermen;
   • Hunters.
      All proposals were taken into account and included in the SEP.
      Following the meeting, minutes of the public consultations were prepared,
taking into account the opinions of stakeholders.
      The draft ESCP and SEP were also published on the official website of the
Committee of Forestry and Wildlife of the Ministry of Ecology and Natural
Resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan for public access:
https://www.gov.kz/memleket/entities/forest/documents/details/969955?lan
g=ru.
      The list of participants in the discussion of the ESCP and SEP is attached.
      Photographic materials are attached.
                Uzbekistan
       Project Implementation Unit
 (PIU) under the Ministry of Economy and
                 Finance


 Phase 3: Uzbekistan One Health for Pandemic
  Prevention, Food Systems Resilience, and
              Ecosystem Health



STAKEHOLDERS ENGAGEMENT PLAN (SEP)




                February 2025



                                               Official Use Only
Official Use Only
                                                              CONTENTS

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................................... 3
   1.     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY............................................................................................................ 4
   2.     BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND INTRODUCTION ............................................................... 5
2.1 SEP Targets .................................................................................................................................. 5
2.2 SEP Objectives.............................................................................................................................. 5
2.3 Description of the Project............................................................................................................. 7
2.4 Legislative Basis............................................................................................................................ 8
2.4.1 National Legislation ................................................................................................................... 8
2.4.2 World Bank Standards ............................................................................................................... 9
   3.     IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS OF STAKEHOLDERS .............................................................. 10
3.1 Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups ....................................................................... 14
   4.     STAKEHOLDERS ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM ........................................................................... 20
4.1 The Purpose and Timeframe of the SE Program .......................................................................... 20
4.2 Proposed Strategy for Information Disclosure............................................................................. 21
4.3 Proposed Strategy to Incorporate the View of Vulnerable Groups............................................... 24
   5.     RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTING PLANNED SEP ACTIVITIES .............. 24
5.1 Resources Required.................................................................................................................... 24
5.2 Project Implementation Arrangements....................................................................................... 25
   6.     GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM (GRM) ............................................................................ 26
6.1 Grievance Redress Mechanism in Uzbekistan ............................................................................. 27
6.2 Receiving of Grievances.............................................................................................................. 29
6.3 Monitoring and Reporting on Grievances.................................................................................... 30
6.4 World Bank Grievance Redress System ....................................................................................... 31
   7.     MONITORING AND REPORTING ............................................................................................ 33
7.1 Involvement of Stakeholders in Monitoring Activities ................................................................. 33
7.2 Reporting to Stakeholder Groups ............................................................................................... 34
   8.     ANNEXES.............................................................................................................................. 35
ANNEX 1. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES LOG .................................................................. 35
ANNEX 2. FORMAT FOR REPORTING MINUTES OF STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION............................ 36
ANNEX 3. GRIEVANCE SUBMISSION AND REVIEW FORM .................................................................. 37




                                                                                                                                                  2




                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                      LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

ABBREVIATION   DESCRIPTION
AMR            Antimicrobial resistance
NCECC          National Committee on Ecology and Climate Change
ESCP           Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESMP           Environmental and Social Management Plan
GBV            Gender-Based Violence
GRM            Grievance Redress Mechanism
MoA            Ministry of Agriculture
MH             Ministry of Health
MEF            Ministry of Economy and Finance
NCSOH          National Coordination Structure "One Health"
NGO            Non-Governmental Organization
PAD            Project Assessment Document
PDO            Project Development Objective
PIM            Project Implementation Manual
PIU            Project Implementation Unit
PrDO           Program Development
SH             Sexual Harassment
SEP            Stakeholder Engagement Plan
WB             World Bank




                                                                  Official Use Only
Official Use Only
1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The purpose of this Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is to identify an appropriate program
and plan to involve stakeholders in the development, implementation and final results of the
“One Health” Project in Uzbekistan. The SEP is designed to create an effective platform for
productive interaction with potentially affected parties and stakeholders. Effective
interaction with stakeholders is a necessary aspect of any successful project, and the “One
Health” Project's SEP will help to obtain feedback for project development and
implementation while managing the expectations of beneficiaries and stakeholders regarding
the project's results.

The “One Health” approach provides a strategic way to reduce the risk of transmission of
pathogens from domestic and wild animals to humans and eliminate threats to the resilience
of food systems in Central Asian countries. Recognizing the link between human health,
animal health, and their shared ecosystems, “One Health” program provides a practical,
comprehensive, and multisectoral framework for pandemic prevention. The project will be
funded by a grant of $1.79 million US dollars from the Pandemic Fund (which corresponds to
the part of the multi-country project "Pandemic Preparedness and Response through the
“One Health” Approach in Central Asia", for which the World Bank (WB) has been designated
as the implementing organization, and Uzbekistan – as a beneficiary). The Ministry of
Economy and Finance (MEF) of Uzbekistan will be responsible for the implementation of the
Project, in particular, a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established under the MEF.

This SEP presents preliminary arrangements for stakeholder engagement, broken down by
categories of different groups, their interests, and consultation topics. The identification and
analysis of stakeholder groups includes government agencies, development partners, civil
society, community organizations, and academia. These stakeholder groups also cover
affected and other stakeholders, key characteristics of vulnerable groups, and their specific
needs. The Stakeholder Engagement program also contains detailed information on the
purpose, timing, and methods of stakeholder engagement, as well as a strategy for the “One
Health” approach to information disclosure that takes into account the viewpoints of
vulnerable groups.

A brief description of key institutions and key persons (coordinators) has been included in the
SEP to simplify the definition of roles and responsibilities. Grievance Redress Mechanism
(GRM) of the Project will be integrated into the existing complaints system acting in
Uzbekistan. The review of grievances and actions taken will be part of the overall monitoring
of the Project Implementation Unit.




                                                                                             4




                                                                                            Official Use Only
2. BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND INTRODUCTION

2.1 SEP Targets

Effective stakeholder engagement is an important part of project management and is a
comprehensive process carried out throughout the project lifecycle. When properly designed
and implemented, this contributes to the development of strong, constructive and
empathetic relationships that are important for the successful management of environmental
and social risks of the project. Stakeholder engagement is most effective if it is initiated at an
early stage of the project development process and is an integral part of early project decision-
making, as well as the assessment, management, and monitoring of environmental and social
risks and impacts of the project. Early involvement and ongoing dialogue with stakeholders
also allow potential problems and risks to be identified at an earlier stage by stakeholders as
they arise or before they arise, and ensure that the project is developed more correctly. There
is clear evidence that the higher the level of stakeholder engagement, the more carefully
potential impacts are identified. All this contributes to the strengthening and sustainable
relationship between the stakeholders and the initiators of the project. This is especially true
for groups and individuals who are directly affected by the planned projects. Building trust
between the parties through a participatory process that allows for open and constructive
interaction is recognized as the key to satisfactorily resolving grievances and issues that, if left
unresolved, could pose a threat to development in the form of unplanned delays and costs.

2.2 SEP Objectives

The main objective of this Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is to identify an appropriate
program and stakeholder engagement plan that will be applied throughout the duration of
the Project and that will contribute to achieving the priorities of the “One Health” Action
Program for pandemic prevention, food system resilience, and ecosystem health in Central
Asia. This document has been developed with the aim of creating an effective platform for
productive interaction with potentially affected parties and others interested in the
implementation and results of the project. The specific objectives of this plan are summarized
in Table 1 below.

                               Table 1. Objectives of the SEP
              Objective                                     Reasoning
 Identification of all relevant Involving as many stakeholders as possible will
 stakeholders for this Project       facilitate comprehensive communication and address
                                     a wide range of issues and concerns. Identify the main
                                     stakeholders that the project affects directly or
                                     indirectly (including vulnerable groups), as well as
                                     those whose interests may influence project decision-
                                     making.
 Methodology of interaction with Describes the approach to engagement that must be
 stakeholders                        applied and planned, and formulates a number of
                                     strategies for timely, relevant, and accessible

                                                                                                 5




                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                      engagement with stakeholders throughout the
                                      project lifecycle.
 Disclosure of accurate               Ensuring that stakeholders, especially those directly
 information about the project in     affected by the proposed Project, have information at
 an open and transparent manner       their disposal with which they can make informed
                                      comments and plan for the future. This reduces the
                                      level of uncertainty and anxiety. The information
                                      should enable affected parties to better understand
                                      the potential impacts, risks and benefits. An open and
                                      transparent approach is central to achieving this goal..
 Identification and resolution of     Documenting stakeholders' concerns allows for
 issues of public concern,            tracking and motivating project decisions, as well as
 questions and suggestions            allowing stakeholders to see to what extent their
                                      contributions have been taken into account in
                                      planning and projecting. This approach eliminates
                                      potential concerns that the involvement of
                                      stakeholders may be a symbolic gesture on the part of
                                      the developer, which complies with legal
                                      requirements but is not taken seriously when planning
                                      a project.
 Managing stakeholders'               Expectations, both positive and negative, are often
 expectations                         incommensurable with the realities of the project.
                                      Ensuring that expectations remain at a realistic level
                                      reduces the likelihood of disappointment to directly
                                      affected parties at later stages of the project.
                                      Disappointment and unfulfilled expectations are key
                                      causes of conflict and require mitigation and
                                      management of consequences that could otherwise
                                      have been avoided.
 Consultations on compliance          Regulatory compliance can avoid potential project
 with national requirements,          delays related to procedural issues rather than
 World Bank requirements and          substantive ones.
 international standards

Against this background, the project will:
   • Ensure regular, timely, accessible and appropriate disclosure of information to all
       stakeholders, especially individuals and groups directly affected by the project, prior
       to consultations and decision-making;
   • Ensure planned and transparent consultations, where necessary, with appropriate
       notification, clear disclosure of objectives, and a consistent process of engagement,
       registration, and follow-up;
   • Ensure that consultations involving women, youth, the elderly and other vulnerable
       groups are fully socially inclusive;
   • Provide stakeholders with the possibility to give advice and contribute to the
       implementation of the project;

                                                                                            6




                                                                                           Official Use Only
   •   Take feedback into account when developing a project or program and report to
       stakeholders;
   •   Ensure a two-way dialogue that gives both sides the opportunity to exchange views
       and information, listen, and ensure that their concerns are heard and resolved;
   •   Promote effective agreements and partnerships by mutually identifying areas of
       cooperation and conducting good-faith negotiations in this context;
   •   Report regularly and in a structured manner to all stakeholders, paying particular
       attention to appropriate reporting forms among the participating communities.
   •   Establish and maintain operational management capacities, responsibilities and
       systems to ensure effective project implementation within the framework of the SEP.
   •   Create clear mechanisms for responding to people's concerns, suggestions, and
       complaints.

2.3 Description of the Project

The proposed project in Uzbekistan will become part of the “One Health” Program for
Pandemic Prevention, Food System Resilience, and Ecosystem Health in Central Asia (the
“One Health” Program). The program includes five Central Asian countries: Uzbekistan,
Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan. Uzbekistan will join the
Program as a Phase 2 project. The project will be funded by a grant of $ 1.79 million US Dollars
from the Pandemic Fund (which corresponds to the part of the multi-country project
"Pandemic Preparedness and Response through the “One Health” approach in Central Asia",
for which the World Bank has been designated as the implementing organization and
Uzbekistan as the beneficiary).

The purpose of the Program (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity for prevention, detection and
response to priority zoonotic diseases, antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and food safety issues
through a regional "One Health" approach in Central Asia. The program will contribute to the
development of core capacities for the implementation of the “One Health” approach at the
national and regional levels, focusing on the creation of a management mechanism and
strengthening existing infrastructure and systems to improve prevention, detection and
response capabilities. The structure of the Program level components is shown below:
    a) Component 1: Strengthening strategic leadership within the framework of the “One
       Health” concept. This component aims to create the fundamental elements for
       effective strategic leadership and intersectoral collaboration within the framework of
       the “One Health” concept
    b) Component 3: Improving “One Health” prevention, detection and early response
       systems. Within this component, national and regional networks will be developed
       and developed or strengthened to support the implementation of surveillance and
       monitoring plans based on risk assessment, as well as response measures.
    c) Component 4: Programme management, monitoring and evaluation, and training




                                                                                             7




                                                                                            Official Use Only
The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the proposed project in Uzbekistan (Phase 2) is
to strengthen the capacity for prevention, detection and response to priority zoonotic
diseases, antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and food safety issues through the "One Health"
approach in Uzbekistan. The project will be implemented in three sectors, i.e., veterinary,
environment and health, and support will also be provided for the establishment of the
National Coordination Structure "One Health" (NCSOH).

The project will provide support to Uzbekistan in the creation and integration of the NCSOH.
The main objective of NCSOH is to promote effective intersectoral coordination at the country
level. The NCSOH will include representatives of three-line ministries participating in the “One
Health” program (healthcare, agriculture/veterinary and environmental protection), as well
as the Ministries of Finance and Economics. NCSOH will have a Secretariat to manage day-to-
day functions to support the implementation of activities within the framework of the “One
Health” initiative in Uzbekistan.

2.4 Legislative Basis

2.4.1 National Legislation
        The national ESA procedure is regulated by the Law "on Environmental Expertise
        "(2000), updated on 29.04.2021, and Cabinet of Ministers Resolution № 541 of
        07.09.2020: "On Approval of the Regulation on State Environmental Expertise". The
        Regulation includes information on the procedure for mandatory public discussions
        and hearings on draft environmental impact assessments for proposed activities
        belonging to Environmental Impact Categories I and II prior to the State
        Environmental Expertise.
        Public participation in the ESA process. The Constitution of the Republic of
        Uzbekistan (arts. 50.55) lays the foundation for the participation of citizens and
        public associations in environmental management. Law of the Republic of
        Uzbekistan of 09.12.1992. (Updated on 07.02.2024) "On nature protection" in
        Articles, 12-13 regulates the right of citizens to unite in public organizations for
        nature protection, to request and receive information about the state of the
        environment and measures taken for its protection, as well as the authority of NGOs
        established. Legislation in the field of ecology and environmental protection
        provides for public participation as a) an individual citizen or a group of citizens; b)
        through citizens' self-governance bodies and c) through non-governmental non-
        profit organizations.
        Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan #LRU-410 dated September 22, 2016, on the
        introduction of amendments and additions to the law of the Republic of Uzbekistan
        “On Labor Protection”. The purpose of this Law is to regulate relations in the field
        of labor protection. Labor protection legislation consists of this Law and other
        legislative acts. If an international treaty of the Republic of Uzbekistan establishes
        rules other than those provided by the legislation of the Republic of Uzbekistan on
        labor protection, then the rules of the international treaty are applied. This Law
        applies to:


                                                                                              8




                                                                                             Official Use Only
       •   employees who are in labor relations with enterprises, institutions, and
           organizations (hereinafter referred to as organizations), as well as with individual
           employers.
       •   students of higher educational institutions, students of secondary specialized,
           vocational educational institutions, students of other educational institutions
           undergoing industrial practice.
       •   military personnel recruited to work in organizations.
       •   citizens doing alternative service.
       •   persons serving a sentence under a court sentence during the period of their work
           in organizations determined by institutions for the execution of punishment, as
           well as persons who are subject to an administrative penalty in the form of
           administrative arrest, persons involved in other types of work, including those
           organized in the interests of society and state.
       Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan #LRU-445 dated September 11, 2017 “About
       appeals of individuals and legal entities”. The purpose of this Law is to regulate
       relations in the field of appeals of individuals and legal entities to state bodies and
       state institutions, as well as to their officials. This Law also applies to organizations
       with state participation and citizens' self-government bodies.
       Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan on guarantees and freedom of information access
       as of April 24, 1997, #400-I governs the relations arising in the implementation
       process of the constitutional right of everyone freely and to unimpeded seek, receive,
       research, to transfer and distribute information.
       Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan on principles and warranties of freedom of
       information as of December 12, 2002, #439-II. The main objectives of this Law are to
       ensure compliance with the principles and guarantees of freedom of information, the
       exercise of the right of everyone to seek, receive, research, disseminate, use and
       store information, as well as ensure the protection of information and information
       security of the individual, society and the state freely and unimpededly.
        Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan on the appeals of individuals and legal entities as of
December 03, 2014 #378 governs grievance redress procedure in Uzbekistan. This Law obliges state
authorities to deal with appeals and provides a clear framework to handle the case. The appeals can
be in the form of applications, proposals, and complaints and submitted in three ways: oral, written,
and digital format. The application or complaint shall be considered within fifteen days from the date
of receipt in the state authority, which is obliged to resolve the issue on the merits, as well as require
additional study and (or) check, a request for additional documents - up to one month. No project-
specific GM is warranted under the national legislation. However, it is allowed to apply to a)
conciliation commission; b) Labor Inspection under the Ministry of Employment and Labor Relations;
and c) court
NOTE: above are an unofficial translation from the origin.

2.4.2 World Bank Standards
The World Bank Environmental and Social Standard (ESS) 10 "Stakeholder Engagement and
Information Disclosure" recognizes "the importance of open and transparent engagement
between the Borrower and project stakeholders as an important element of international
practice" (World Bank, 2017: 97). In particular, the requirements set out in ESS 10 are:
                                                                                         9




                                                                                              Official Use Only
  •   "Borrowers will interact with stakeholders throughout the project life cycle, beginning
      such interaction as early as possible in the project development process and within a
      time frame that allows for meaningful consultations with stakeholders on project
      development issues. The nature, scope and frequency of stakeholder engagement will
      be proportionate to the nature and scale of the project and its potential risks and
      impacts.
  • Borrowers will conduct a meaningful consultation with all stakeholders. Borrowers will
      provide to stakeholders timely, relevant, understandable and accessible information
      and consult with them in a culturally appropriate manner, free from manipulation,
      interference, coercion, discrimination and intimidation.
  • The stakeholder engagement process will include the following, as outlined in more
      detail in this ESS: (i) stakeholder identification and analysis; (ii) planning for stakeholder
      engagement; (iii) information disclosure; (iv) consultations with stakeholders; (v)
      grievance process and response; and (vi) reporting to stakeholders.
  • The Borrower will maintain, and disclose as part of the environmental and social
      assessment, a documented report on stakeholder engagement, including a description
      of the stakeholders consulted, a summary of the feedback received, and a brief
      explanation of how feedback was considered or why it was not." (World Bank, 2017: p.
      98).
The borrower should develop a stakeholder engagement plan commensurate with the nature
and scale of the project and its potential risks and impacts. It should be disclosed as early as
possible and prior to project appraisal, and the Borrower should seek stakeholder opinion on




                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                Official Use Only
the SEP, including stakeholder identification and suggestions for future engagement. If the
SEP is substantially amended, the Borrower must disclose the updated SEP (World Bank, 2017:
p.99). According to ESS 10, the Borrower must also propose and implement Grievance Redress
Mechanism for timely receipt and facilitation of resolution of project-affected parties'
concerns and complaints related to the project's environmental and social performance
(World Bank, 2017: p. 100).
For more information on the World Bank's environmental and social standards, follow the
links below:
www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/environmental-and-social-
framework/brief/environmental-and-social-standards           and                 http://projects-
beta.vsemirnyjbank.org/ru/projects-operations/environmental-and-social-
framework/brief/environmental-and-social-standards


3. IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS OF STAKEHOLDERS

Stakeholders – include individuals or groups directly or indirectly affected by the project, as
well as those who may be interested in the project and/or are able to influence its results
both positively and negatively. To develop an effective SEP, it is first necessary to identify who
the stakeholders are, their groups and subgroups.
In order to ensure effective and thoughtful interaction, the stakeholders of the proposed
project can be divided into the following main categories:
    i. Affected stakeholders – individuals, groups and organizations within the project's
        sphere of influence who are directly affected or may be affected by the project and/or
        who have been identified as the individuals (groups) most susceptible to project-
        related changes and who should actively participate in the process of determining
        impacts and their significance as well as in the decision-making process on mitigation
        or management measures;
   ii. Other stakeholders – individuals, groups, or organizations who may not be directly
        affected by the Project, but believe that the project affects their interests, and/or who
        could in any way influence the project and its implementation process;
  iii. Vulnerable groups – are persons who, due to their vulnerability, may be
        disproportionately affected or further disadvantaged in connection with the
        implementation of the project(s) in comparison with other groups, and for whom
        special interaction measures may be required in order to ensure their equal
        representation in the process of consultations and decision–making related to the
        project.

Table 2 below shows the key groups and subgroups of stakeholders who may be interested in
the project and/or are able to influence its results both positively and negatively. This list of
stakeholders is likely to expand/change in composition as the Project progresses, and since the
SEP is a “living document”, it will be updated regularly (at least annually) throughout the
duration of the Project as needed.


                                                                                               11




                                                                                              Official Use Only
           Table 2. List of stakeholders in the “One Health” Project in Uzbekistan.
            Stakeholder – Group                          Stakeholder – Subgroup
                                 I. AFFECTED STAKEHOLDERS
                          Governmental Authorities of Uzbekistan
 Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of - Committee on Veterinary and Livestock
 Uzbekistan                                   Development
 National Committee on Ecology and
 Climate Change



 Ministry of Health of the Republic of        - Committee for Sanitary and
 Uzbekistan                                   Epidemiological Welfare and Public Health
                                              (CSEWPH)




 Committee on Veterinary and Livestock     -
 Development of the Republic of Uzbekistan




 Committee for Sanitary and                   -
 Epidemiological Well-being and Public
 Health of the Republic of Uzbekistan



 National One Health Coordination Structure


 Ministry of Economics and Finance (MEF)      - Project Implementation Unit
            Public organizations, NGOs, and commercial (private) organizations
 Environmental Protection Society             - Society divisions
 Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs    - Cattle farms
 of Uzbekistan


Table 3 below describes the roles and influence of the above-mentioned stakeholder groups
within the Project.

     Table 3. Roles and influences of stakeholder groups in the “One Health” Project in
                                         Uzbekistan.
                                                                                          12




                                                                                          Official Use Only
           Stakeholder – Group                           Roles and Influences
                                I. AFFECTED STAKEHOLDERS
                         Governmental Authorities of Uzbekistan
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of   1. Increasing the capacity of the State
Uzbekistan                                   Veterinary Service to combat infectious
                                             animal diseases by evaluating the regulatory
                                             framework for infectious animal diseases;
                                             2. Study and update of legislative documents
                                             on priority zoonoses;

           Stakeholder – Group                            Roles and Influences
                                             3. Revision of veterinary rules, regulations,
                                             standard operating procedures for infectious
                                             diseases of animals, regulations on
                                             antimicrobial resistance, guidelines on food
                                             safety;
                                             4. Improvement of laboratory capacity and
                                             development of regulations through the
                                             purchase      of    appropriate     laboratory
                                             equipment and consumables (reagents) for
                                             the diagnosis of priority zoonoses and
                                             infectious diseases;
                                             5. Purchase of veterinary instruments,
                                             disinfecting vehicles and equipment to be
                                             used      during     active    epidemiological
                                             surveillance of zoonoses;
                                             6. Development of an improved veterinary
                                             epidemiological surveillance system based on
                                             the recommendations of an international
                                             expert and risk analysis;
                                             7. Conducting capacity-building trainings for
                                             veterinarians and other stakeholders,
                                             including flexible schedule trainings to
                                             address      the      needs        of     all
                                             participants,
                                             especially female specialists.




                                                                                         13




                                                                                        Official Use Only
National Committee on Ecology and   Improving field operations and wildlife health
Climate Change (NCECC)              monitoring through procurement:
                                    1. To improve the safe, timely and efficient
                                    collection, storage and preliminary analysis of
                                    biological animal samples;
                                    2. Of the State Nature Reserve to improve
                                    their ability to monitor and report on the
                                    results of epidemiological surveillance of wild
                                    animals and waterfowl during field work;
                                    3. To      strengthen     monitoring       and
                                    epidemiological surveillance of populations of
                                    migratory birds and wild animals by
                                    employees of the State Nature Reserve and
                                    other stakeholders (scientists, amateur
                                    ornithologists,             non-governmental
                                    organizations, local communities)




         Stakeholder – Group                    Roles and Influences




                                                                                 14




                                                                                Official Use Only
Ministry of Health (MH)                      Strengthening epidemiological surveillance
                                             capacity for priority zoonotic diseases (i.e.,
                                             brucellosis, echinococcosis and rabies) and
                                             improving diagnostic coverage and quality in
                                             existing public health laboratories in the
                                             country by purchasing:
                                             1. IT equipment for updating the Automatic
                                             Data Control System (ACS) to include
                                             additional modules on epidemiological
                                             surveillance of priority zoonoses (for example,
                                             brucellosis, echinococcosis, rabies and
                                             plague) and facilitate electronic data
                                             exchange with the State Veterinary Service
                                             under the Ministry of Agriculture to obtain
                                             information on epidemiological surveillance
                                             in case of detection or suspicion of zoonotic
                                             infections, as well as animal populations;
                                             2. Diagnostic equipment and reagents for
                                             public health laboratories for rapid diagnosis
                                             of priority zoonoses (i.e., brucellosis and
                                             echinococcosis) and for preventive purposes;
                                             3. Accreditation of laboratories of public
                                             health organizations, including the hiring of an
                                             accreditation agency (for example, payment
                                             for accreditation by an ISO- accredited
                                             accreditation      agency)     according      to
                                             international laboratory quality standards.
                                             The target standards for accreditation will
                                             include ISO15189 (i.e., special quality
                                             standards for medical laboratories) and
                                             ISO17025 (i.e., ensuring the competence,
                                             impartiality and consistent functioning of
                                             laboratories, ensuring reliable results)
National One Health Coordination Structure   Assistance to relevant ministries and
                                             departments in the implementation of the
                                             Project.
Ministry of Economy and Finance of the       Is the responsible party for the
Republic of Uzbekistan                       implementation of the Project. A Project
                                             Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established
                                             under the MEF, which will coordinate
                                             incoming and outgoing flows of funds, among
                                             other things. Providing support to PIU with

           Stakeholder – Group                           Roles and Influences


                                                                                           15




                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                                  the creation and implementation of a
                                                  monitoring and evaluation system and
                                                  structure for managing, tracking and
                                                  informing on the progress of the Project,
                                                  including operating costs and compliance with
                                                  fiduciary     and      ESS      requirements,
                                                  implementation of training programs for PIU
                                                  employees, including with regard to gender
                                                  issues.
            Public organizations, NGOs, and commercial (private) organizations
    -    Regional Environmental Centre for They can become project partners. They are
        Central Asia (CAREC)                 potential partners in carrying out activities to
    -   Republican Center for Social and     inform about risks and prevent the
        Economic Development “Sabr”          dissemination of false information.
    -   Uzbekistan Ecological Movement
    -   Association of Farmers of Uzbekistan
    -   Institute of Botany of the Academy
        of Sciences of the Republic of
        Uzbekistan
    -   Research Institute of Zoology of the
        Academy of Sciences of the Republic
        of Uzbekistan

 Regional Environmental Centre for Central Asia
 (previous CAREC)



 Cattle farms, owners and shepherds of            They are one of the main beneficiaries of the
 livestock                                        Project to reduce the risk of transmission of
                                                  pathogens from domestic and wild animals to
                                                  humans and eliminate threats to the
                                                  sustainability of food systems.


3.1 Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups

It is extremely important to understand whether the results and consequences of a Project
may disproportionately affect disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups who often
do not have the possibility to express their concerns or realize the impact of the project. In
this regard, it is important to ensure that awareness-raising and engagement activities with
disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups on pandemic prevention, food system
resilience and ecosystem health, in particular, are tailored to the specifics, concerns and
cultural characteristics of such groups or individuals, as well as to ensure a full understanding
of activities and the benefits of the project. A person may be vulnerable due to their origin,
gender, age, health status, unfavorable economic situation and financial insecurity, socially

                                                                                              16




                                                                                             Official Use Only
vulnerable position in society (for example, minorities or informal groups), dependence on
other people or natural resources, etc. In order to interact with vulnerable populations and
individuals, it is often necessary to take special measures and facilitate their participation in
the decision-making process related to the Project, while ensuring that their awareness and
contribution to the overall process are commensurate with other stakeholders.

Within the framework of the Project, vulnerable or disadvantaged groups of the population
include the following categories of citizens:
    • Elderly pensioners;
    • Persons with disabilities;
    • Pregnant women, infants and children;
    • Female-headed households and/or single mothers raising minor children;




                                                                                              17




                                                                                             Official Use Only
   •   Large families with low incomes;
   •   Unemployed;
   •   Residents of orphanages and orphanages, and people living in nursing homes;
   •   Stateless persons and refugees;
   •   Migrants.

Consultations with the affected groups in the communities are carried out using special tools
and approaches, depending on the situation. A description of the methods of interaction
within the framework of the project is presented in the following sections of this SEP.




                                                                                          18




                                                                                         Official Use Only
            Table 4. The following NGOs and CSOs operating in the fields of environmental protection, public health, and community
            development may be engaged in stakeholder consultations and awareness-raising activities under the Project:
                                                                                                                                  Stakeholder
      Stakeholder                 Description           Area of influence          Area of interest         Project Impact
                                                                                                                                  Significance
                                                              Project Affected Parties
                                                                                                         Benefit from
                                                     National veterinary                                 legislative
                           The Ministry                                         Maintaining
                                                     policy oversight,                                   assessment,
                           responsible for                                      operations and
Ministry of Agriculture of                           regulating project                                  improving laboratory        High
                           agricultural                                         meeting new project
the Republic of                                      impacts on natural                                  capacity and
                           management policies                                  standards.
Uzbekistan                                           resources.                                          developing
                                                                                                         regulations.
                                                                                Improvement of the
                                                     Supervision as the         field operations and
                                                     competent authority        wildlife health
                            Committee responsible                                                        Enhanced
National                                             for the implementation     monitoring by
                            for environmental                                                            infrastructure and          High
Committee on                                         of benefit-sharing plans   purchasing the
                            protection policy                                                            operational capacity.
Ecology and                                          developed for the          necessary equipment
Climate Change                                       Project.                   in specially protected
                                                                                natural areas.
                                                                                Ensuring project         One of the main
                                                     National health
                                                                                compliance with          implementing
                            Responsible for public   regulations and public
                                                                                public health            government
                            health policies and      health projects related
                                                                                standards and            organizations. Main
                            regulations              to environmental
                                                                                policies                 project impact is
                                                     impact
Ministry of Health of the                                                                                strengthened existing
                                                                                                                                     High
Republic of Uzbekistan                                                          Benefit from             infrastructure and
                            Government labs          Maintaining standards
                                                                                renovation and new       systems for improved
                            conducting research      and adopting new
                                                                                equipment, and           prevention,
                            and diagnostics on       operational guidelines
                                                                                enhanced skills from     detection, and
                            public health            related to project
                                                                                training sessions        response to infectious
                                                     activities
                                                                                organized and            diseases.




                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                                                                                             Stakeholder
     Stakeholder               Description             Area of influence         Area of interest       Project Impact
                                                                                                                             Significance
                                                                              implemented for the
                                                                              protject.


                        Local Administration
                        responsible for
                                                                              Ensuring
                        managing and
                                                                              transparency,         Improved health,
                        overseeing public           Local administration
National One                                                                  accountability, and   environmental and
                        services, implementing      represents local                                                           Medium
Health                                                                        positive social and   veterinary services in
                        local policies, and         interests.
Coordination                                                                  environmental         regions.
                        ensuring the
Structure                                                                     outcomes.
                        community's well-
                        being.
                        Is the responsible party
                        for the implementation
                        of the Project. A Project
                                                    National and regional     Supporting integrated
                        Implementation Unit
                                                    level coordination of     approaches to health
Ministry of Economy and (PIU) will be established                                                    Project
                                                    public health, animal     and ensuring effective                            High
Finance of the Republic under the MEF, which                                                         implementation.
                                                    health, and               coordination of all
of Uzbekistan           will coordinate
                                                    environmental factors     sectors
                        incoming and outgoing
                        flows of funds, among
                        other things.
                                                                              Ensuring
                         Organization               Advocating for            transparency,
                                                                                                    Improved health and
Environmental            representing civil         environmental causes      accountability, and
                                                                                                    veterinary services in     Medium
Protection Society       interests and promoting    at local, national, and   positive
                                                                                                    the country.
                         environmental justice      regional levels           environmental
                                                                              outcomes

                                                                                                                                            17




                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                                                                                                              Stakeholder
     Stakeholder               Description             Area of influence          Area of interest       Project Impact
                                                                                                                              Significance



Cattle farms

                                                    These stakeholders play                           These stakeholders to
                                                    a critical role in the                            benefit from the
                                                                               Protecting their
                         Communities reliant on     formation of public                               project with improved
                                                                               livelihoods and
                         farming and livestock      opinion towards the                               health and veterinary    Medium
                                                                               securing better
                         for their livelihood       Project and allowing for                          services          and
                                                                               resources
                                                    the smooth functioning                            vaccination for their
Owners and shepherds                                of the Project.                                   livestock.
of livestock




Private legal entities
                                                    Supply chain
and individuals                                                                Maintaining business
                         Businesses involved in     operations, providing
engaged in the supply                                                          relationships and      Partnership with the
                         supplying goods and        necessary materials and                                                    Medium
of machinery,                                                                  ensuring compliance    project.
                         services for the project   services for project
equipment and                                                                  with project
                                                    implementation
reagents




                                                                                                                                             18




                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                                                                                                                  Stakeholder
      Stakeholder               Description             Area of influence         Area of interest        Project Impact
                                                                                                                                  Significance
                                                             Other Interested Parties



                                                    A project financing                                Greater development
                                                    organization focused on                            success and economic
                                                                              Ensuring
                                                    the successful                                     stability. The World
                                                                              transparency,
 International            International Financing implementation of the                                Bank will see a solid
                                                                              accountability, and
 Organizations            Institution financing the project. Provides                                  return on investment,          High
                                                                              positive social and
 (World Bank)             Project                   technical and advisory                             both financially and
                                                                              environmental
                                                    support during the                                 socio-economically,
                                                                              outcomes.
                                                    implementation of the                              turning funds into
                                                    project.                                           lasting change.



Regional Environmental A regional                  Regional and national       Strengthening          Facilitation of           Medium to High
Centre for Central Asia intergovernmental          level – technical advisory, environmental          stakeholder
(previous CAREC)        organization supporting stakeholder engagement, governance, biodiversity consultations, support
                        environmental              and environmental policy conservation, climate to awareness-raising
                        sustainability and climate support.                    adaptation, and public activities, dissemination
                        resilience initiatives in                              awareness.             of project information,
                        Central Asia.                                                                 and provision of
                                                                                                      technical inputs on
                                                                                                      environmental and
                                                                                                      climate-related aspects.




                                                                                                                                                 19




                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Local environmental       Local non-governmental Local and regional level – Environmental          Participation in       Medium
NGOs and community-       and civil society         community engagement protection, biodiversity, stakeholder
based organizations       organizations working in and outreach.            public health,         consultations, support
working in biodiversity   environmental protection,                         community resilience, to information
conservation and          public health, and                                and access to          dissemination,
livestock management.     community development.                            information.           facilitation of
                                                                                                   engagement with
                                                                                                   vulnerable groups,
                                                                                                   awareness-raising
                                                                                                   campaigns, and
                                                                                                   feedback collection.




                                                     Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups


                                                                                                            Improved health and
 Disadvantaged /            Disadvantaged /             Inclusive outcomes and     Ensuring their rights
                                                                                                            veterinary services in
 vulnerable individuals     vulnerable individuals      stronger community         and accessibility                                    Low
                                                                                                            the country. Project
 or groups                  or groups                   support.                   needs are protected
                                                                                                            support.


 For the purpose of analyzes:
     • Influence: the social group is able to significantly influence the process of Project implementation;
     • Interest: a social group or individuals not necessarily directly affected by the Project may (or may not) show interest in it;
     • Impact: the implementation of the Project may significantly affect a certain social group (stakeholders).

Regional Environmental Centre for Central Asia (CAREC) and relevant national NGOs are considered supporting stakeholders. While they are not directly
involved in project implementation, they play an important role in facilitating stakeholder engagement, supporting awareness-raising activities, and
strengthening communication with local communities, including vulnerable groups. Their involvement enhances transparency, inclusiveness, and
effectiveness of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan.
                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
4. STAKEHOLDERS ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM

4.1 The Purpose and Timeframe of the SE Program

This Stakeholder Engagement Program is designed to create an effective platform for
productive engagement with potentially affected parties and others interested in the results
of the “One Health” approach for pandemic prevention, food system resilience, and
ecosystem health in Central Asia. Constructive interaction with stakeholders throughout the
entire project cycle will allow to:
    • Request feedback for the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the
        Project;
    • Clarify project objectives, scope, and expectations management;
    • Assess and reduce the environmental and social risks of the project;
    • Improve the results and benefits of the project;
    • Involve stakeholders and establish cooperation;
    • Disseminate reliable information/materials on the Project;
    • Receive and consider complaints about the Project.

Adequate consultations with stakeholders will require timely implementation and advance
planning. To ensure that information is accessible to stakeholders, as well as the proper
representation and participation of various groups in the process, the “One Health” Approach
will use various methods based on stakeholder needs assessment. The interaction methods
are listed in Table 5 below.

 Table 5. Methods of stakeholder engagement in the “One Health” program for pandemic
          prevention, food system resilience, and ecosystem health in Central Asia
   Engagement
                        Description and Application        Target audience      Frequency/Timeline
     method
    Websites         The Project Assessment Document       All stakeholders      Within 2 months
                     (PAD)      and      the    Project                           from the Grant
                     Implementation Manual (PIM), as                            Agreement Effective
                     well as the Environmental and                                     Date
                     Social Commitment Plan (ESCP),
                     and the SEP will be published on
                     the official websites of partner
                     ministries and agencies and the
                     World Bank.
 Communication       Distribution of reliable project       Government               Quarterly
  via phone and      information     to     government     officials, NGOs,
   messengers,       officials, organizations, agencies   public associations
 correspondence      and companies and invitation of      and development
        by           stakeholders to meetings.                 partners
   email and in
      written
       form
 Internet/ Digital   Use of the official websites of           Project           Within 3 months
      Media          partnering and implementing          stakeholders and        from the Grant
                     Ministries and Agencies to           other interested      Agreement Effective




                                                                                                 Official Use Only
   Engagement
                     Description and Application            Target audience      Frequency/Timeline
     method
                  promote various information and           parties that have        Date, and
                  updates on the overall Project,             access to the      throughout Project
                  impact assessment and impact             internet resources.     implementation
                  management                process,
                  procurement,         employment
                  opportunities, as well as on
                  Project’s engagement activities
                  with the public.
   One-on-one     This will be used to solicit views           Vulnerable         Within 2 months
    interviews    and opinions on project impacts            persons, public        from the Grant
                  and solutions.                             organizations,      Agreement Effective
                                                              associations,            Date, and
                                                               NGOs, etc.        throughout Project
                                                                                   implementation
   Workshops      This channel will be used to:              Government           Within 2 months
                  (i) Present project information to a       organizations,         from the Grant
                  group of stakeholders;                     NGOs, public        Agreement Effective
                  (ii) Allow the group of stakeholders       organizations,              Date
                  to provide their views and                    industry
                  opinions;                                   associations
                  (iii) Use participatory exercises to
                  facilitate     group      discussions,
                  brainstorm        issues,     analyze
                  information,        and       develop
                  recommendations and strategies;
                  and
                  (iv) Recording of responses.


4.2 Proposed Strategy for Information Disclosure

The interaction of stakeholders within the framework of the One Health Program will be
carried out in accordance with the standard project management cycle, which includes: (i) the
Preparation and Design Phase; (ii) the Implementation Phase; (iii) the Monitoring Phase; and
(iv) the Completion and Evaluation Phase. The information disclosure strategy is presented in
Table 6 below.




                                                                                                  21




                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                    Table 6. Information disclosure strategy within the framework of the “One Health” Program
                  List of information to         Method
 Project stage                                                    Target Stakeholders      Topic of consultation   Responsibility
                       be disclosed             proposed
Preparation and   ESCP, SEP                Official websites    Stakeholders at the      Environmental and              PIU
 Design Phase                                                   national, region and     Social Management,
                                                                district levels.         procurement,
                                                                                         Stakeholder
                                                                                         engagement.
                                           Workshops            Region, district , and   Project concept,          PIU, MoA, EPM,
                                                                community levels         method of selection of         MHMI
                                                                                         beneficiary
                                                                                         communities, benefits,
                                                                                         impact.
                                           Public discussions Community-level            Project concept,          PIU, MoA, EPM,
                                           and consultations stakeholders                method of selection of         MHMI
                                           with affected                                 beneficiary
                                           parties                                       communities, benefits,
                                                                                         impact.
Implementation    Environmental and        Official websites    International, national, Projects benefits,        PIU, MoA, EPM,
     Phase        Social Management                             region and district impacts (Security, GRM,        MHMI, Project
                  Plan (ESMP), Labor                            level stakeholders       GBV issues and             Management
                  Management                                                             mitigation                      Unit
                  Procedure,
                  Occupational Health
                  and Safety Plan,
                  emergency
                  preparedness and
                  response

                                                                                                                                    22




                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                   List of information to        Method
 Project stage                                                   Target Stakeholders    Topic of consultation   Responsibility
                         be disclosed           proposed
                   Project Monitoring
                   and safeguard
                   compliance report
  Monitoring       Quarterly and Annual     Bulletin boards,   Stakeholders at the     Project performance,       Project
   Phase           Performance reports      district and tuman region and district     GRM, Security, GBV       Management
                                            branches of the    levels                  education                   Unit
                   Environmental and        MoA, EPM, MHMI
                   Social Audit reports

                   Updates on project
                   activities
Completion and     Project Completion       Institutional      All stakeholders        Project results            Project
Evaluation Phase   Report                   completion                                                          Management
                                            reports                                                                Unit




                                                                                                                                 23




                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
4.3 Proposed Strategy to Incorporate the View of Vulnerable Groups

The principle of inclusiveness will guide the stakeholder engagements, particularly with respect
to vulnerable individuals and groups. In cases where vulnerable status may lead to people’s
reluctance or physical incapacity to participate in large-scale community meetings, the project
will hold separate small group discussions with them at an easily accessible venue. This way, the
project will reach out to groups who, under normal circumstances, may be insufficiently
represented at general community gatherings. Some strategies to be adopted to reach out to
these groups include:

   •   Identify leaders of vulnerable and marginalized groups to reach-out to these groups.
   •   Maintain a database of marginalized groups through existing sector associations, such as
       the Association of the Disabled People, the Society for the Deaf and Dumb, etc.
   •   Leverage existing health and environmental projects that include vulnerable populations
       that overlap with this project to use their systems to identify and engage them.
   •   Involve community leaders, community organizations, and NGOs working with vulnerable
       groups.
   •   Organize face-to-face discussions in focus groups with these population groups.


5. RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTING PLANNED SEP
   ACTIVITIES

5.1 Resources Required

The "One Health" approach in Uzbekistan will be implemented in three sectors, i.e., agriculture,
environment and healthcare, and support will be provided for the establishment of the National
Coordination Structure "One Health" (NCSOH).

The project will be funded by a grant of $ 1.79 million US dollars from the Pandemic Fund (which
corresponds to the part of the multi-country project "Pandemic Preparedness and Response
through the “One Health” Approach in Central Asia", for which the World Bank has been
designated as the implementing organization and Uzbekistan as the beneficiary)

The following organizations were identified as implementing agencies:
   A. Ministry of Agriculture;
   B. National Committee on Ecology and Climate Change;
   C. Ministry of Health;
   D. National Coordination Structure "One Health";
   E. Project Implementation Unit under the Ministry of Economy and Finance.

Table 7 provides an overview of budget allocations for the SEP implementation.




                                                                                               24




                                                                                       Official Use Only
                    Table 7. Summary table of budget allocation, in US dollars
     Stakeholder Engagement              Unit Cost,          Quantity            Total cost
             Activities                    (USD)                                  (USD)*
 Social Development, environment 2 000                     24 months                48 000
 and GRM Specialist (2 years XXX
 USD/m)
 Travel expenses of E&S staff (cost 400                    5                        2 000
 per     year)     for    stakeholder
 engagement
 Communication materials (leaflets, 20                     100                      2 000
 posters, PR kits including design)
 Total:                                                                             67 500
*Approximate amount

5.2 Project Implementation Arrangements

In order to achieve the objectives of the Project, the implementing agencies will carry out the
following activities with the relevant ministries and stakeholders in the country:

   A. Ministry of Agriculture (MoA):       The proposed measures are aimed at increasing the
      capacity of the State Veterinary Service to combat infectious animal diseases through
      legislative assessment, improving laboratory capacity and developing regulations.
      Activities include:
       • Assessment of the legislative framework;
       • Revision of legislative documents;
       • Improvement of national epidemiological surveillance systems;
       • Purchase of veterinary instruments;
       • Providing field veterinarians with equipment.

   B. National Committee on Ecology and Climate Change (NCECC): The proposed measures
      are aimed at improving field operations and monitoring the health of wild animals by
      purchasing the necessary equipment. Activities include:
      • Purchase of communication and surveillance equipment for state nature reserves;
      • Purchase of equipment for animal treatment and testing;

   C. Ministry of Health (MH): The proposed activities will aim to strengthen epidemiological
      surveillance capacity for priority zoonotic diseases (i.e. brucellosis, echinococcosis and
      rabies) and improve diagnostic coverage and quality in existing public health laboratories
      in the country. The proposed measures are aimed at modernizing the system supported
      by the COVID-19 Response Project, i.e., Automated Data Management for Sanitary and
      Epidemiological Surveillance (ADMSES) and diagnostic capabilities in microbiological and
      serological laboratories (which were supported by the Avian Influenza Project). Activities
      include:
          • Purchase of IT-equipment for 95 facilities of the sanitary and epidemiological service
            of regional significance (including checkpoints).
          • Purchase of diagnostic supplies and reagents for rapid diagnosis of brucellosis and
            echinococcosis.
                                                                                               25




                                                                                        Official Use Only
            • Accreditation of central public health laboratories.

    D. National Coordination Structure "One Health" (NCSOH): The “One Health” project will
       provide support to Uzbekistan in the creation and implementation of the NCSOH. The
       main objective of NCSOH is to promote effective intersectoral coordination at the country
       (national) level. The NCSOH will include representatives of three-line ministries
       participating in the “One Health” program (healthcare, agriculture/veterinary and
       environmental protection), as well as the Ministries of Finance and Economics. NCSOH
       will have a Secretariat to manage day-to-day functions to support the implementation of
       activities within the framework of the “One Health” Initiative in Uzbekistan. The NCSOH
       should be established on the basis of a ministerial order or resolution to fulfill the legal
       requirement of the World Bank within the framework of this project.


    E. The Ministry of Economy and Finance has been appointed as the responsible party for the
        implementation of the One Health Program. A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be
        established under the MEF. Three employees of the Ministry were identified to lead the
        work of the PIU and asked to explore options for direct selection of relevant employees
        who will be granted official leave without pay. This is due to the fact that for the MEF this
        will be the first experience of implementing a World Bank project in many years, and they
        will need to ensure constant monitoring of the ongoing implementation and interagency
        coordination. It is expected that the following positions will be held at the PIU:
        Head/Coordinator of the Project, Procurement Specialist, Financial Management
        Specialist, Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, Environmental and Social Affairs
        Specialist, Project Assistant. Additional technical staff can be hired on a one-time basis,
        depending on the needs of the Project.


6. GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM (GRM)

The main objective of the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is to assist in the timely, effective
and efficient handling of grievances and claims on issues related to the implementation of the Project,
so that the result satisfies all stakeholders. In particular, it provides for a transparent and reliable
process to achieve fair, effective and sustainable results. It also helps to build trust and cooperation,
which are integral components of a broader community consultation process that facilitates the
implementation of corrective actions.

In particular, GRM:
    • Provides affected people with the opportunity to file a complaint (grievance) or resolve
        any dispute that may arise during the implementation of project activities;
    • Ensures that appropriate and mutually acceptable corrective measures are identified
        and implemented to the satisfaction of the complaining party;
    • Avoids the need to go to court.




                                                                                                      26




                                                                                              Official Use Only
   6.1 Grievance Redress Mechanism in Uzbekistan

   The national ESA procedure is regulated by the Law "on Environmental Expertise "(2000),
   updated on 29.04.2021, and Cabinet of Ministers Resolution № 541 of 07.09.2020: "On
   Approval of the Regulation on State Environmental Expertise". The Regulation includes
   information on the procedure for mandatory public discussions and hearings on draft
   environmental impact assessments for proposed activities belonging to Environmental
   Impact Categories I and II prior to the State Environmental Expertise.
   Public participation in the ESA process. The Constitution of the Republic of Uzbekistan (arts.
   50.55) lays the foundation for the participation of citizens and public associations in
   environmental management. Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan of 09.12.1992. (Updated on
   07.02.2024) "On nature protection" in Articles, 12-13 regulates the right of citizens to unite
   in public organizations for nature protection, to request and receive information about the
   state of the environment and measures taken for its protection, as well as the authority of
   NGOs established. Legislation in the field of ecology and environmental protection provides
   for public participation as a) an individual citizen or a group of citizens; b) through citizens'
   self-governance bodies and c) through non-governmental non-profit organizations.
   Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan #LRU-410 dated September 22, 2016, on the introduction
   of amendments and additions to the law of the Republic of Uzbekistan “On Labor
   Protection”. The purpose of this Law is to regulate relations in the field of labor protection.
   Labor protection legislation consists of this Law and other legislative acts. If an international
   treaty of the Republic of Uzbekistan establishes rules other than those provided by the
   legislation of the Republic of Uzbekistan on labor protection, then the rules of the
   international treaty are applied. This Law applies to:
    •    employees who are in labor relations with enterprises, institutions, and organizations
   (hereinafter referred to as organizations), as well as with individual employers.
    •    students of higher educational institutions, students of secondary specialized, vocational
   educational institutions, students of other educational institutions undergoing industrial practice.
    •    military personnel recruited to work in organizations.
    •    citizens doing alternative service.
    •    persons serving a sentence under a court sentence during the period of their work in
   organizations determined by institutions for the execution of punishment, as well as persons who
   are subject to an administrative penalty in the form of administrative arrest, persons involved in
   other types of work, including those organized in the interests of society and state.
Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan #LRU-445 dated September 11, 2017 “About appeals of individuals
   and legal entities”. The purpose of this Law is to regulate relations in the field of appeals of
   individuals and legal entities to state bodies and state institutions, as well as to their officials. This
   Law also applies to organizations with state participation and citizens' self-government bodies.
Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan on guarantees and freedom of information access as of April 24,
   1997, #400-I governs the relations arising in the implementation process of the constitutional right
   of everyone freely and to unimpeded seek, receive, research, to transfer and distribute
   information.
Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan on principles and warranties of freedom of information as of
   December 12, 2002, #439-II. The main objectives of this Law are to ensure compliance with the
   principles and guarantees of freedom of information, the exercise of the right of everyone to seek,
                                                                                                  27




                                                                                                 Official Use Only
   receive, research, disseminate, use and store information, as well as ensure the protection of
   information and information security of the individual, society and the state freely and
   unimpededly.
Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan on the appeals of individuals and legal entities as of December
   03, 2014 #378 governs grievance redress procedure in Uzbekistan. This Law obliges state
   authorities to deal with appeals and provides a clear framework to handle the case. The appeals
   can be in the form of applications, proposals, and complaints and submitted in three ways: oral,
   written, and digital format. The application or complaint shall be considered within fifteen days
   from the date of receipt in the state authority, which is obliged to resolve the issue on the merits,
   as well as require additional study and (or) check, a request for additional documents - up to one
   month. No project-specific GM is warranted under the national legislation. However, it is allowed
   to apply to a) conciliation commission; b) Labor Inspection under the Ministry of Employment and
   Labor Relations; and c) court (The law has been revised as LRU №445).

   NOTE: above are an unofficial translation from the origin.

   According to the results of a preliminary assessment of the grievance filing and redress systems
   in Uzbekistan, it has been revealed that effective mechanisms exist in the country that are
   accessible to any person to address and appeal against any actions and omissions of officials,
   authorities, local governments and public associations.

   The Grievance Redress Mechanism within the framework of the Project is based on the existing
   grievance filing and redress mechanism of the MEF of Uzbekistan, in order to ensure further
   consistency and sustainability of institutional mechanisms and GRM systems.

   The project monitors communication channels for compliance with required standards, evaluates
   the quality of work, collects data on grievances and appeals received, monitors the measures
   taken on appeals, prepares a review within the framework of quarterly reports, and suggests
   measures to further improve the work of the GRM.

   The public and interested parties can send their grievances and appeals on issues related to the
   implementation of the Project to the PIU system at the MEF of Uzbekistan, the World Bank
   system, the Prosecutor's Office, the Supreme Control Chamber, the Presidential Administration
   or relevant government agencies using various communication channels (hotline, online
   complaint filing, in writing in writing and by phone), using the communication channels of the
   PIU or the World Bank.

   Such a system and the necessary (including staffing) chain of actions to address grievances – from
   registration, sorting and processing, confirmation of receipt and follow-up, to verification and
   adoption of actions and final feedback - is contained in this GRM Plan. In emergency situations,
   in order to encourage the proactive participation of beneficiaries, information messages will be
   distributed through the media, social networks, focus groups and other channels of face-to-face
   and remote communication, which will make it possible to convey relevant information to the
   public. As part of the awareness-raising campaigns, the PIU will ensure appropriate staff training
   and the availability of the necessary information and experience to conduct telephone
   consultations and receive feedback on issues related to the “One Health” program.

                                                                                                     28




                                                                                             Official Use Only
    The chain of grievance review actions includes receipt of the grievance, registration, sorting,
    processing, confirmation, follow–up, verification, action or forwarding, and feedback - these are
    described in this GRM Plan.

    To receive grievances, the project will use the systems and channels listed below (hotline, online,
    written, mailbox, and telephone complaint channels) to ensure that all information related to the
    project is disseminated and complaints and responses are adequately monitored, followed by
    review and resolution.
    All grievances which are received by employees of the PIU, the World Bank and other channels
    for receiving and collecting grievances are recorded in the registration log, which indicates the
    type of grievance, details of the problem, contact details of people, deadline and agreed actions.

    The grievances received are forwarded to the relevant employees of the PIU, for sorting and
    deciding on further processing and follow-up. If the grievance falls within the competence of
    another organization or ministry (for example, it concerns migration, travel, compensation, etc.),
    the grievance is forwarded accordingly. The actions taken or the completion of the response are
    recorded in the log. If a citizen is not satisfied, he may additionally apply to the Prosecutor's
    Office, the Supreme Control Chamber of Uzbekistan or the Presidential Administration. All
    grievances submitted to government agencies are duly registered and reviewed. The citizen's
    response to his grievance is mandatory.

    The project supports national GRM systems within the strict framework of WB operations in
    Uzbekistan.

    The project collects data from the GRM for inclusion in the quarterly progress report on the
    project for the World Bank.
    Channels for accessing information on the One Health project and submitting grievances to the
    PIU:
        • Central Hotline: +99871 203 00 50
        • E-mail:
        • Oral or written grievances received during work meetings and personal reception;
        • Incoming correspondence delivered by courier to the PIU at the MEF of Uzbekistan;
        • Incoming mail received: Istiklol Street #29, Tashkent Uzbekistan
        • The contact phone number of the public reception of the PIU: +99871 203 00 50;

•   Feedback link on the MEF of Uzbekistan website: The World Bank Grievance System:
       • E-mail: grievances@worldbank.org
       • Fax: +1.202.614.7313
       • Incoming mail received: The World Bank, Grievance Redress Service, MSN MC10-1018,
          1818 H Street Northwest, Washington, DC 20433, USA
       • Through the World Bank Representative Office in the country: Uzbekistan.
       • Telephone:
       • E-mai:

    Anonymous grievances are also accepted through any of these channels. In addition, there is a
    special window for handling complaints related to Gender-Based Violence, and all appeals should
    be considered separately and remain completely confidential.
                                                                                                29




                                                                                             Official Use Only
6.2 Receiving of Grievances

Upon receiving a grievance related to the project, the following points are determined:
   • Type of grievance;
   •   Grievance category;
   •   Persons responsible for examining and reviewing the grievance;
   •   The time limit for reviewing the grievance;
   •   Coordinated actions.

After determining the type of grievance, the responsible person registers the detailed
information in the appropriate correspondence journal. The person who filed the grievance
receives a notification by phone or e-mail about the following:
    • Full name of the contractor to whom the grievance was sent;
    • Review period (no more than 30 days from the date of registration, in case of an
       emergency, appropriate measures are taken within 5 working days);
    • The relevant deadlines and actions are determined in accordance with the instructions of
       the PIU at the MEF of Uzbekistan on handling grievances.
    • The notification is recorded in the outgoing correspondence log. The specialist of the PIU
       at the MEF of Uzbekistan responsible for grievances will ensure proper handling of the
       grievance.

If the person who filed the grievance is not satisfied with the decision taken as a result of the
consideration of the grievance, he has the right to appeal such a decision. The application for
appeal is considered by the Head/Project Coordinator or PIU specialists. After reviewing the
appeal application, if the citizen/beneficiary is not satisfied with the decision, he/she has the right
to appeal against such decision or apply to the grievances system, as indicated in Section 5.1 of
this Plan. In addition, Grievance Committees will have a special window to address issues related
to sexual-based violence and sexual abuse/harassment (SBV/SH). In order to ensure effective
functioning, the PIU assists in: (i) raising awareness among workers and communities; (ii) ensuring
that relevant stakeholders understand what can and should not be done; and (iii) providing
information on ways to report cases of SBV/SH; and (iv) the development of protocols to address
issues, taking into account the sensitivity of the communication and respect for the
confidentiality of the data of the affected persons.


6.3 Monitoring and Reporting on Grievances

The contact persons for filing a complaint with the PIU at the MEF of Uzbekistan and the World
Bank are responsible for:
   • Collection and analysis of high-quality data received from a Grievance Liaison Specialist
       on the number, content and status of grievances, and uploading them to a single project
       database;
   • Monitoring unresolved issues and proposing measures to resolve them;
   • Preparation of quarterly reports on the mechanisms of the GRM for submission to the
       World Bank.

The quarterly reports for the World Bank will include a section related to the GRM containing
                                                                                                     30




                                                                                             Official Use Only
    updated information of the following nature:
       • The status of the implementation of the GRM (procedures, training, public awareness
          campaigns, budgeting, etc.);
        •   qualitative data on the number of grievances received (applications, suggestions,
            complaints, requests, positive feedback), with a separate indication of grievances
            related to forced relocation and the number of resolved grievances, if any;
        •   Quantitative data on the type of grievances and responses to them, questions
            submitted, and grievances that remain unresolved;
        •   the level of satisfaction with the measures taken (response);
        •   Corrective measures taken.

    6.4 World Bank Grievance Redress System

    Communities and individuals who believe that a project supported by the World Bank has had an
    adverse impact on them can also file a grievance directly with the Bank through the Bank's
    Grievance Service (GS). (http://projects-beta.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-
    and-services/grievance-redress-service). A grievance can be filed in English, Turkmen or Russian
    languages, although additional time will be required to consider grievances filed in languages
    other than English. A grievance can be submitted to the Bank's GS through the following channels:
        • E-mail: grievances@worldbank.org
        • Fax: +1.202.614.7313
        • Mail: The World Bank, Grievance Redress Service, MSN MC10-1018, 1818 H Street
            Northwest, Washington, DC 20433, USA

•   Through the World Bank Representative Office in the country: The grievance must clearly indicate
    the adverse impact(s) allegedly or allegedly incurred in connection with the implementation of a project
    supported by the World Bank. It is necessary to attach the available documents and correspondence, if
    possible. The person who filed the grievance may also indicate the desired outcome of the grievance.
    Finally, the grievance must include the person(s) who filed the grievance, or their designated
    representatives, and contact information. Grievance filed through the GS are dealt with promptly, which
    provides an opportunity to respond quickly to problems related to the project.

    In addition, communities and individuals affected by the project can file a grievance with the
    World Bank's Independent Inspectorate, which determines whether harm has been caused or
    could have been caused as a result of the World Bank's failure to comply with its policies and
    procedures. A grievance can be filed with the Independent Inspectorate at any time after the
    World Bank has been notified of the relevant issues and after the World Bank Management has
    been given the opportunity to respond to it. To get information on how to file a grievance with
    the World Bank's Independent Inspectorate, follow the link: www.inspectionpanel.org

                                  PROJECT GRM PROCESS FLOW (CHART)

                                       Step 1. Submission (Day 0–1)
                                                   ⬇
                         Step 2. Registration & Acknowledgement (within 3 days)
                                                   ⬇


                                                                                                          31




                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                               ⬇
                            Step 3. Sorting & Assignment (Day 3–5)
                                               ⬇
                      Step 4. Investigation & Corrective Action (Day 5–20)
                                               ⬇
                  Step 5. Response & Feedback to Complainant (Day 20–30)
                                               ⬇
             Step 6. Appeal / Escalation (immediately after decision, if unsatisfied)
                                               ⬇
             Step 7. Closure & Reporting (Quarterly aggregation & WB reporting)

Step-by-Step Process Description

Step 1 – Submission (Day 0–1)

   •   Grievance received through hotline, email, in person, mailbox, or WB channels.
   •   Support will be provided for illiterate or disabled complainants through staff assistance.
   •   Anonymous and GBV/SEA/SH-related complaints are accepted and treated
       confidentially.

Step 2 – Registration & Acknowledgement (within 3 days)

   •   PIU registers grievance in the log/database.
   •   Complainant is informed (by phone, email, or letter) about:
          o Contact person at PIU,
          o Maximum review time (30 days),
          o Special fast-track for emergencies (within 5 working days).

Step 3 – Sorting & Assignment (Day 3–5)

   •   Grievance categorized (minor, major, GBV, compensation, etc.).
   •   Responsibility assigned to relevant PIU specialist or forwarded to competent authority.

Step 4 – Investigation & Corrective Action (Day 5–20)

   •   Facts are verified, field visits conducted if needed.
   •   PIU consults with affected persons and stakeholders.
   •   Corrective actions are prepared and implemented.
   •   Urgent cases resolved within 5 working days.

Step 5 – Response & Feedback (Day 20–30)

   •   Complainant receives formal response in writing or verbally.
   •   Decision includes corrective measures, timeline, or reason for rejection.
   •   Entry is updated in the grievance log.



                                                                                                 32




                                                                                         Official Use Only
Step 6 – Appeal / Escalation (Immediately after response if unsatisfied)

   •   Escalation to:
          o PIU Head / Project Coordinator,
          o MEF,
          o National grievance bodies (Prosecutor’s Office, Ombudsman), or
          o WB Grievance Redress Service (GRS) / Inspection Panel.

Step 7 – Closure & Reporting (Quarterly)

   •   Resolved grievances are marked as closed in the system.
   •   All cases are aggregated and analyzed for the quarterly report to the World Bank,
       covering:
            o Number and type of grievances,
            o Resolution rate,
            o Lessons learned,
            o Satisfaction level



7. MONITORING AND REPORTING

Monitoring and tracking interactions with stakeholders is important to ensure effective
continuous communication and follow-up, as well as to minimize omissions and monitor the
fulfillment of important commitments. The “One Health” program will keep a log of interactions
with stakeholders, which records all completed or planned interactions with stakeholders. The
interaction log includes information about the location and dates of meetings, seminars, and
discussions, as well as a description of the parties affected by the project and other stakeholders
consulted. The monitoring reports submitted to the PIU and the Bank will include logs of
interaction with stakeholders, as well as feedback from the GRM. This may also include, for
example, information on how the Ministry implementing the project responded to concerns
raised, how these responses were communicated to those consulted, details of outstanding
issues and any planned follow-up actions. The annual reporting on the SEP will be part of the
project monitoring report.

The project will also develop an evaluation form to assess the effectiveness of each formal
interaction process. The questions will be written in such a way that they are suitable for the
appropriate audience.


7.1 Involvement of Stakeholders in Monitoring Activities

As mentioned earlier, the Project Implementation Group will oversee the implementation of the
SEP. The Environmental and Social Affairs Specialist, together with the Project Monitoring and
Evaluation Specialist, will monitor the implementation of this Stakeholder Engagement Plan in
accordance with the requirements of the legal agreement, including the Environmental and
Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). The team will monitor and document any commitments or


                                                                                                 33




                                                                                         Official Use Only
actions agreed upon during the consultation, including changes resulting from changes to the
project structure or the ESCP.

Data for monitoring beneficiaries, businesses, associations, and organizations, as well as training
service providers, will be collected through self-reporting, according to a schedule, and using
standardized forms and procedures. Information from these beneficiaries will also be collected
during monitoring visits by employees of ministries and implementing agencies.


7.2 Reporting to Stakeholder Groups

Reports for stakeholder groups will be compiled in various ways, including annual national
performance review meetings for all implementing agencies. Through the planned
communication channels, the results of the project will be disseminated to stakeholders at the
national and subnational levels.




                                                                                                 34




                                                                                         Official Use Only
8. ANNEXES

ANNEX 1. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES LOG


                                                            Purpose of   Key outcomes   Number of participants      Reference to
Sr. No.   Stakeholder Groups   Date   Location and Venue
                                                           Engagement     and Actions      (male/female)              records




                                                                                                                               35


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only


                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
ANNEX 2. FORMAT FOR REPORTING MINUTES OF STAKEHOLDER
CONSULTATION

                        MINUTES OF THE STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION

  A    Project Title:
  B    Stakeholder Title:
Note: This document provides a working summary of the main facts captured during the
consultation/ key informant interview held and should not be treated as formal minutes. It is
therefore deliberately not exhaustive or chronological. Its purpose is to record significant
information/ feedback and not intended for official review or approval.
       Basic details:
  C    Location:
       Date:
       Attended By (List attached):
  D
       Full name                       Designation
       Purpose of Consultation
  E


       Key Points Discussed:




  F    Key concern and suggestion expressed by Stakeholder:




                                                                                           36

                                                                                          Official Use Only
ANNEX 3. GRIEVANCE SUBMISSION AND REVIEW FORM

                                   GRIEVANCE SUBMISSION FORM
  Grievance Registration Number
  PART ONE
  GRIEVANCE DATA
  (To be completed by the complainant OR by the complaints desk for mailed grievances and
  phone calls)
  1.1 Information on the offending activity
  Name of alleged offender/ violator
  Address
  Telephone No.
  E-mail address
  1.2 Brief description of the grievance (where necessary attach additional sheet)




  1.3 Information on alleged source
  Type of activity
  Location (provide sketch)
  Date offending activity detected
  Nature of violation (check YES/N               - Continuous Yes [ ] No [ ]
                                                 - Intermittent/ On and Off Yes [ ] No [ ]
  1.4 Grievance Report History
  Has grievance been reported before? (YES or
  NO)
  TO PIU? (YES or NO)
  If yes indicate the following
  Was the report made verbally? (YES or NO)
  Date of report
  Office reported                                Head Office [ ]
                                                 Regional Office [ ]
  1.5 Complainants Particulars
  Name
  Address
  Telephone No.
  Fax No.
  Signature
  Time
  Date
  E-mail address
  1.6 Do you request that identity be kept
  confidential? (YES or NO)
  1.7 How do you want to be contacted?           E-mail [ ] Telephone [ ]
  1.8 PIU receiving employee/Grievances Desk
  Employee name
  Signature
  Date

                                                                                             37

                                                                                             Official Use Only
PART TWO
GRIEVANCE REFERRAL FOR INVESTIGATION
(To be completed by PIU Officials)
2.1 Registration of grievance
Is grievance registered (YES or NO)
If yes, specify the registration number
2.2 Referral to Appropriate Department / Region (Check)
     ➢ Building Environment [ ]
     ➢ Natural Resources [ ]
     ➢ Mining and Industry [ ]
     ➢ Inspectorate [ ]
     ➢ Regional Programme Officers [ ]
     ➢ Environmental Quality [ ]
PART THREE
GRIEVANCE INVESTIGATION SUMMARY REPORT
(To be completed by the investigator)
3.1 Verification of information on the alleged offender/ violator
Name       (registered      activity/ individual
responsible)
Address
Telephone No.
Fax No.
E-mail address
3.2 OBSERVATION AND FINDINGS
3.2.1 Offending activity
3.2.2 Location (check) GPS Reading               ➢ Residential [ ]
                                                 ➢ Commercial [ ]
                                                 ➢ Industrial [ ]
                                                 ➢ Mixed [ ]
3.2.3 Pollution Type (check)                     ➢ Noise [ ]
                                                 ➢ Dust/particulate/smoke [ ]
                                                 ➢ Water [ ]
                                                 ➢ Land degradation [ ]
                                                 ➢ Odour [ ]
3.2.4 Source/ causes                             ➢ Improper sitting [ ]
                                                 ➢ Poor        Environmental  Management
                                                     Practice [ ]
                                                 ➢ Other(s), specify



3.2.5 Potential impact on public health (check)   ➢   Immediate [ ]
                                                  ➢   Short Term [ ]
                                                  ➢   Long Term [ ]
                                                  ➢   Other(s), Specify




                                                                                           38

                                                                                           Official Use Only
  World Bank Group               Project implementation Unit (PIU) under Ministry of
                                       Economy and Finance of Uzbekistan

Presentation and public consultations on:
➢ Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
➢ Stakeholders Engagement plan (SEP)

  Uzbekistan One Health for Pandemic Prevention, Food Systems Resilience, and
                              Ecosystem Health
                                 (P512354)


                    February 2026
• “One Health” is an integrated, unified approach aimed at ensuring a sustainable balance and
  optimizing the health of humans, animals and ecosystems.
• It is based on the recognition of the close connection and interdependence between the health
  of humans, domestic and wild animals, plants and the wider environment (including
  ecosystems).
Project Background(1)
• The proposed project in Uzbekistan will become part of the One
  Health Program for Pandemic Prevention, Food System Resilience,
  and Ecosystem Health in Central Asia (the One Health Program). The
  program includes five Central Asian countries: Uzbekistan,
  Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan.
• Uzbekistan will join the Program as a Phase 2 project. The project
  will be funded by a grant of US$ 1.79 million from the Pandemic Fund
  (which corresponds to the part of the multi-country project
  "Pandemic Preparedness and Response through the One Health
  Approach in Central Asia", for which the World Bank has been
  designated as the implementing organization and Uzbekistan as the
  beneficiary).
Project Background (2)
• The goal of the Development Program (PrDO) is to strengthen
  capacities in the field of prevention, detection and response to
  priority zoonotic diseases, antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and food
  safety issues through a regional "One Health" approach in Central
  Asia. The program will contribute to the development of core
  capacities for the implementation of the One Health approach at the
  national and regional levels, focusing on the creation of a
  management mechanism and strengthening existing infrastructure
  and systems to improve prevention, detection and response
  capabilities.
Project Background (3)
The structure of the Program level components is shown below:
Component 1: Strengthening strategic leadership within the framework of the “One Health”
concept. This component aims to create the fundamental elements for effective strategic
leadership and intersectoral collaboration within the framework of the “One Health”
concept
Component 3: Improving “One Health” prevention, detection and early response systems.
Within this component, national and regional networks will be developed and developed or
strengthened to support the implementation of surveillance and monitoring plans based on
risk assessment, as well as response measures.
Component 4: Programme management, monitoring and evaluation, and training.
            Overview of the One Health in Central Asia Action Framework

   High-level goals              Priority tasks        The general approach         Areas of activity




    Pandemic                       Control of                                          Component 1:
   prevention,                     zoonoses
                                                                              Strengthening strategic leadership
preparedness and
    response


Sustainability of food             Prevention of
                                                             «One Health»
systems, agricultural              antimicrobial
                                    resistance
                                                              Agriculture,
competitiveness and
trade development
                                                             environmental
                                                              protection,               Component 3:
                                                               healthcare
                                                                               Improving prevention, detection
                                                                                 and early response systems


Ecosystem health
                                Ensuring food safety                                    Component 4:
                                                                                  Program management,
                                                                               monitoring and evaluation, and
                                                                                         training.
The project will be implemented in three sectors, i.e.:
1. Agriculture (veterinary medicine);
2. Environment
3. Healthcare.

Support will also be provided for the creation of the National
Coordination Structure "One Health" (NCSOH).

The NCSOH will include representatives of three line ministries
participating in the One Health program (healthcare,
agriculture/veterinary and environmental protection), as well as
the Ministry of Economy and Finance of Uzbekistan.
                PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION UNIT
The Ministry of Economy and Finance of Uzbekistan has been appointed
as the responsible party for the implementation of the One Health
Program. A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established under
the MEF. It is expected that the following positions will be held in the PIU:

- Head/Coordinator of the Project;
- Procurement Specialist;
- Financial Management Specialist;
- Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist;
- Environmental and Social Affairs Specialist;

Additional technical staff can be hired on a one-time basis, depending on
the need.
        Environmental and Social Principles of the World Bank*
The Environmental and Social principles of the World Bank reflect the organization's commitment
to sustainable development goals and provide for the implementation of policies and a number of
Environmental and Standards (ESS) of the Bank, developed to support projects implemented by
Borrowers in the interests of eradicating extreme poverty and promoting shared well-being.

These Principles include:

• The concept of sustainable development, reflecting the Bank's focus on achieving
environmental and social sustainability;
• The Environmental and Social Policy of the World Bank for investment and project financing
purposes, sets out the requirements that the Bank must comply with in relation to projects that it
supports through investment and project financing; and
• Environmental and Standards (ESS) along with their appendices, which establish mandatory
requirements for the Borrower and projects.


* https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/376931518802050637-
0290022019/original/EnvironmentalSocialFrameworkRussian.pdf
           World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (1)

The Environmental and Social Standards formulate requirements for Borrowers regarding
the identification and assessment of environmental and social risks and impacts associated
with projects financed by the Bank using investment and project financing tools.

Implementation of the ESS will allow:
(a) To support Borrowers in applying international best practices in the field of
    environmental and social sustainability;
(b) To assist Borrowers in meeting national and international environmental and
    social obligations;
(c) To support their efforts to prevent discrimination, increase transparency, increase
    participation, ensure accountability and improve governance; and
(d) To ensure that projects achieve sustainable development results through continuous
    engagement with stakeholders.
             World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (2)
• Environmental and Social Standard 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and
Social Risks and Impacts;
• Environmental and Social Standard 2: Labor and Working Conditions;
• Environmental and Social Standard 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and
Management;
• Environmental and Social Standard 4: Community Health and Safety;
• Environmental and Social Standard 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary
Resettlement;
• Environmental and Social Standard 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management
of Living Natural Resources;
• Environmental and Social Standard 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
Traditional Local Communities;
• Environmental and Social Standard 8: Cultural Heritage;
• Environmental and Social Standard 9: Financial Intermediaries; and
• Environmental and Social Standard 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure.
The following ESS are applicable to the present One Health project:
• Environmental and Social Standard 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and
Social Risks and Impacts;
• Environmental and Social Standard 2: Labor and Working Conditions;
• Environmental and Social Standard 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and
Management;
• Environmental and Social Standard 4: Community Health and Safety;
• Environmental and Social Standard 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management
of Living Natural Resource;
• Environmental and Social Standard 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure.

According to the above Principles and the WB ESS, the following have been developed for
the present Project:
- Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), and
- Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP)
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
• The Recipient shall ensure that the Project is carried out in accordance with
  the Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) and this Environmental and
  Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), in a manner acceptable to the Bank.

• The ESCP is a part of the Grant Agreement.

• This ESCP sets out material measures and actions that the Recipient shall carry
  out or cause to be carried out, including, as applicable, their respective
  timeframes:
       - institutional
       - staffing
       - training
       - monitoring and reporting arrangements, and
       - grievance management.
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
• The ESCP also sets out the environmental and social (E&S) documents that
  shall be adopted and implemented under the Project, all of which shall be
  subject to prior consultation and disclosure, consistent with the ESSs, and
  in form and substance, and in a manner acceptable to the Bank. Once
  adopted, said E&S documents may be revised from time to time with prior
  written agreement by the Bank.

• As agreed by the Bank and the Recipient, this ESCP will be revised from
  time to time, if necessary, to reflect adaptive management of Project
  changes or unforeseen circumstances or in response to Project
  performance. The Recipient shall promptly disclose the updated ESCP.

• all actions and measures in this ESCP shall be implemented as set out in
  the timeframe.
Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP)
The purpose of this Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is to identify an appropriate
program and plan to involve stakeholders in the development, implementation and final
results of the “One Health” Project in Uzbekistan. The SEP is designed to create an
effective platform for productive interaction with potentially affected parties and
stakeholders.

This SEP presents preliminary arrangements for stakeholder engagement, broken down
by categories of different groups, their interests, and consultation topics. The
identification and analysis of stakeholder groups includes government agencies,
development partners, civil society, community organizations, and academia. These
stakeholder groups also cover affected and other stakeholders, key characteristics of
vulnerable groups, and their specific needs. The Stakeholder Engagement program also
contains detailed information on the purpose, timing, and methods of stakeholder
engagement, as well as a strategy for the “One Health” approach to information
disclosure that takes into account the viewpoints of vulnerable groups, as well as
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).
Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP)
Against this background, the project will:
• Ensure regular, timely, accessible and appropriate disclosure of information to all stakeholders,
   especially individuals and groups directly affected by the project, prior to consultations and
   decision-making;
• Ensure planned and transparent consultations, where necessary, with appropriate notification,
   clear disclosure of objectives, and a consistent process of engagement, registration, and follow-
   up;
• Ensure that consultations involving women, youth, the elderly and other vulnerable groups are
   fully socially inclusive;
• Provide stakeholders with the possibility to give advice and contribute to the implementation of
   the project;
• Take feedback into account when developing a project or program and report to stakeholders;
• Ensure a two-way dialogue that gives both sides the opportunity to exchange views and
   information, listen, and ensure that their concerns are heard and resolved;
• Promote effective agreements and partnerships by mutually identifying areas of cooperation and
   conducting good-faith negotiations in this context;
• Report regularly and in a structured manner to all stakeholders, paying particular attention to
   appropriate reporting forms among the participating communities.
• Establish and maintain operational management capacities, responsibilities and systems to
   ensure effective project implementation within the framework of the SEP.
• Create clear mechanisms for responding to people's concerns, suggestions, and complaints.
LEGISLATIVE BASIS
 National legislation:
The national ESA procedure is regulated by the Law "on Environmental Expertise "(2000), updated on
29.04.2021, and Cabinet of Ministers Resolution № 541 of 07.09.2020: "On Approval of the Regulation on
State Environmental Expertise". The Regulation includes information on the procedure for mandatory public
discussions and hearings on draft environmental impact assessments for proposed activities belonging to
Environmental Impact Categories I and II prior to the State Environmental Expertise.
Public participation in the ESA process. The Constitution of the Republic of Uzbekistan (arts. 50.55) lays the
foundation for the participation of citizens and public associations in environmental management. Law of the
Republic of Uzbekistan of 09.12.1992. (Updated on 07.02.2024) "On nature protection" in Articles, 12-13
regulates the right of citizens to unite in public organizations for nature protection, to request and receive
information about the state of the environment and measures taken for its protection, as well as the authority
of NGOs established. Legislation in the field of ecology and environmental protection provides for public
participation as a) an individual citizen or a group of citizens; b) through citizens' self-governance bodies and
c) through non-governmental non-profit organizations.
Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan #LRU-410 dated September 22, 2016, on the introduction of amendments
and additions to the law of the Republic of Uzbekistan “On Labor Protection”. The purpose of this Law is to
regulate relations in the field of labor protection. Labor protection legislation consists of this Law and other
legislative acts. If an international treaty of the Republic of Uzbekistan establishes rules other than those
provided by the legislation of the Republic of Uzbekistan on labor protection, then the rules of the
 international treaty are applied. This Law applies to:
• employees who are in labor relations with enterprises, institutions, and organizations (hereinafter referred
   to as organizations), as well as with individual employers.
• students of higher educational institutions, students of secondary specialized, vocational educational
   institutions, students of other educational institutions undergoing industrial practice.
• military personnel recruited to work in organizations.
• citizens doing alternative service.
• persons serving a sentence under a court sentence during the period of their work in organizations
   determined by institutions for the execution of punishment, as well as persons who are subject to an
   administrative penalty in the form of administrative arrest, persons involved in other types of work, including
   those organized in the interests of society and state.
Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan #LRU-445 dated September 11, 2017 “About appeals of individuals and
legal entities”. The purpose of this Law is to regulate relations in the field of appeals of individuals and legal
entities to state bodies and state institutions, as well as to their officials. This Law also applies to organizations
with state participation and citizens' self-government bodies.
Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan on guarantees and freedom of information access as of April 24, 1997,
#400-I governs the relations arising in the implementation process of the constitutional right of everyone freely
and to unimpeded seek, receive, research, to transfer and distribute information.
Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan on principles and warranties of freedom of information as of December
12, 2002, #439-II. The main objectives of this Law are to ensure compliance with the principles and guarantees
of freedom of information, the exercise of the right of everyone to seek, receive, research, disseminate, use
and store information, as well as ensure the protection of information and information security of the
individual, society and the state freely and unimpededly.
Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan on the appeals of individuals and legal entities as of December 03, 2014
#378 governs grievance redress procedure in Uzbekistan. This Law obliges state authorities to deal with
appeals and provides a clear framework to handle the case. The appeals can be in the form of applications,
proposals, and complaints and submitted in three ways: oral, written, and digital format. The application or
complaint shall be considered within fifteen days from the date of receipt in the state authority, which is
obliged to resolve the issue on the merits, as well as require additional study and (or) check, a request for
additional documents - up to one month. No project-specific GM is warranted under the national legislation.
However, it is allowed to apply to a) conciliation commission; b) Labor Inspection under the Ministry of
Employment and Labor Relations; and c) court
NOTE: above are an unofficial translation from the origin.

 World Bank Standards:
 • The World Bank Environmental and Social Standard (ESS) 10 "Stakeholder Engagement and Information
   Disclosure" recognizes "the importance of open and transparent engagement between the Borrower and
   project stakeholders as an important element of international practice" (World Bank, 2017: 97).
IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS OF STAKEHOLDERS
Stakeholders – include individuals or groups directly or indirectly affected by the project, as well as those who
may be interested in the project and/or are able to influence its results both positively and negatively. To develop
an effective SEP, it is first necessary to identify who the stakeholders are, their groups and subgroups.
In order to ensure effective and thoughtful interaction, the stakeholders of the proposed project can be divided
into the following main categories:
i. Affected stakeholders – individuals, groups and organizations within the project's sphere of influence who are
directly affected or may be affected by the project and/or who have been identified as the individuals (groups)
most susceptible to project-related changes and who should actively participate in the process of determining
impacts and their significance as well as in the decision-making process on mitigation or management measures;
ii. Other stakeholders – individuals, groups, or organizations who may not be directly affected by the Project, but
believe that the project affects their interests, and/or who could in any way influence the project and its
implementation process;
iii. Vulnerable groups – are persons who, due to their vulnerability, may be disproportionately affected or further
disadvantaged in connection with the implementation of the project(s) in comparison with other groups, and for
whom special interaction measures may be required in order to ensure their equal representation in the process
of consultations and decision–making related to the project.
             Stakeholder – Group                            Stakeholder – Subgroup

                                   I. AFFECTED STAKEHOLDERS

                           Governmental Authorities of Turkmenistan
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of     - Committee on Veterinary and Livestock
Uzbekistan (MoA)                                Development
National Committee on Ecology and Climate
Change (NCECC)
                                                                                              Table below shows the
                                                                                              key groups and
                                                                                              subgroups of
Ministry of Health of the Republic of          - Committee for Sanitary and Epidemiological   stakeholders who may
Uzbekistan                                     Welfare and Public Health (CSEWPH)             be interested in the
                                                                                              project “One Health”
                                                                                              in Uzbekistan and/or
                                                                                              are able to influence
                                                                                              its results both
Ministry of Economic and Finance of the        - Project Implementation Unit
                                                                                              positively and
Republic of Uzbekistan (MEF)                                                                  negatively
               Public organizations, NGOs, and commercial (private) organizations
Environmental Protection Society             - Society divisions
Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs of - Cattle farms
Turkmenistan
Owners and shepherds of livestock
            Roles and influences of stakeholder groups in the “One Health” Project in Uzbekistan
                                                                                        National Committee on Ecology and   Improving field operations and wildlife health
        Stakeholder – Group                      Roles and Influences                   Climate Change                      monitoring through procurement:
                                                                                                                            1. Specialized materials to improve the safe,
                       I. AFFECTED STAKEHOLDERS                                                                             timely and efficient collection, storage and
                                                                                                                            preliminary analysis of biological animal
                  Governmental Authorities of Turkmenistan                                                                  samples;
                                                                                                                            2. Communication devices and binoculars for
Ministry of Agriculture of the       1. Increasing the capacity of the State                                                field workers of the State Nature Reserve to
                                                                                                                            improve their ability to monitor and report on
Republic of Uzbekistan               Veterinary Service to combat infectious                                                the results of epidemiological surveillance of
                                     animal diseases by evaluating the regulatory                                           wild animals and waterfowl during field work;
                                                                                                                            3. Transport and IT equipment, as well as
                                     framework for infectious animal diseases;                                              specialized technical assistance to strengthen
                                     2. Study and update of legislative documents                                           monitoring and epidemiological surveillance
                                                                                                                            of populations of migratory birds and wild
                                     on priority zoonoses;                                                                  animals by employees of the State Nature
                                     3. Revision of veterinary rules, regulations,                                          Reserve and other stakeholders (scientists,
                                     standard operating procedures for infectious                                           amateur ornithologists, non-governmental
                                                                                                                            organizations, local communities), especially
                                     diseases of animals, regulations on                                                    during periods of emergency caused by
                                                                                                                            zoonoses
                                     antimicrobial resistance, guidelines on food
                                                                                        Ministry of Health (MH)             Strengthening epidemiological surveillance
                                     safety;                                                                                capacity for priority zoonotic diseases (i.e.,
                                     4. Improvement of laboratory capacity and                                              brucellosis, echinococcosis and rabies) and
                                                                                                                            improving diagnostic coverage and quality in
                                     development of regulations through the                                                 existing public health laboratories in the
                                     purchase of appropriate laboratory equipment                                           country by purchasing:
                                                                                                                            1. IT equipment for updating the Automatic
                                     and consumables (reagents) for the diagnosis                                           Data Control System (ACS) to include
                                     of priority zoonoses and infectious diseases;                                          additional     modules     on    epidemiological
                                                                                                                            surveillance of priority zoonoses (for example,
                                     5. Purchase of veterinary instruments,                                                 brucellosis, echinococcosis, rabies and plague)
                                     disinfecting vehicles and equipment to be used                                         and facilitate electronic data exchange with the
                                                                                                                            State Veterinary Service under the Ministry of
                                     during active epidemiological surveillance of                                          Agriculture     to    obtain   information    on
                                     zoonoses;                                                                              epidemiological surveillance in case of
                                                                                                                            detection or suspicion of zoonotic infections,
                                     6. Development of an improved veterinary                                               as well as animal populations;
                                     epidemiological surveillance system based on                                           2. Diagnostic equipment and reagents for
                                     the recommendations of an international                                                public health laboratories for rapid diagnosis
                                                                                                                            of priority zoonoses (i.e., brucellosis and
                                     expert and risk analysis;                                                              echinococcosis) and for preventive purposes;
                                     7. Conducting capacity-building trainings for                                          3. Accreditation of laboratories of public
                                                                                                                            health organizations, including the hiring of an
                                     veterinarians and other stakeholders, including                                        accreditation agency (for example, payment
                                     flexible schedule trainings to address the needs                                       for accreditation by an ISO-accredited
                                                                                                                            accreditation      agency)      according     to
                                     of all participants, especially female                                                 international laboratory quality standards. The
                                     specialists.                                                                           target standards for accreditation will include
                                                                                                                            ISO15189 (i.e., special quality standards for
Roles and influences of stakeholder groups in the “One Health” Project in Uzbekistan

        Ministry of Economic and Finance of the   Is the responsible party for the implementation
        Republic of Uzbekistan                    of the Project. A Project Implementation Unit
                                                  (PIU) will be established under the MEF,
                                                  which will coordinate incoming and outgoing
                                                  flows of funds, among other things. Providing
                                                  support to PIU with the creation and
                                                  implementation of a monitoring and
                                                  evaluation system and structure for managing,
                                                  tracking and informing on the progress of the
                                                  Project, including operating costs and
                                                  compliance with fiduciary and ESS
                                                  requirements, implementation of training
                                                  programs for PIU employees, including with
                                                  regard to gender issues.
                 Public organizations, NGOs, and commercial (private) organizations
        Environmental Protection Society          They can become project partners. They are
                                                  potential partners in carrying out activities to
                                                  inform about risks and prevent the
                                                  dissemination of false information.
        Cattle farms, owners and shepherds of     They are one of the main beneficiaries of the
        livestock                                 Project to reduce the risk of transmission of
                                                  pathogens from domestic and wild animals to
                                                  humans and eliminate threats to the
                                                  sustainability of food systems.
                Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups
A person may be vulnerable due to their          Within the framework of the Project, vulnerable or
origin, gender, age, health status,              disadvantaged groups of the population include the
unfavorable economic situation and financial     following categories of citizens:
insecurity, socially vulnerable position in      • Elderly pensioners;
society (for example, minorities or informal     • Persons with disabilities;
groups), dependence on other people or           • Pregnant women, infants and children;
natural resources, etc. In order to interact     • Female-headed households and/or single mothers
with vulnerable populations and individuals,     raising minor children;
it is often necessary to take special measures   • Large families with low incomes;
and facilitate their participation in the        • Unemployed;
decision-making process related to the           • Residents of orphanages and orphanages, and people
Project, while ensuring that their awareness     living in nursing homes;
and contribution to the overall process are      • Stateless persons and refugees;
commensurate with other stakeholders.            • Migrants.

                                                 Consultations with the affected groups in the communities
                                                 are carried out using special tools and approaches,
                                                 depending on the situation. A description of the methods
                                                 of interaction within the framework of the project is
                                                 presented in the following sections of this SEP
   Analysis and prioritization of      Stakeholder           Description         Area of influence       Area of interest      Project Impact
                                                                                                                                                   Stakeholder
stakeholder groups based on level                                                                                                                  Significance

 of interest and influence on the                                                     Project Affected Parties
            project* (1)                                                                                                      Benefit from
                                                                                                                              legislative
                                                       The Ministry             National veterinary
                                                                                                        Maintaining           assessment,
                                                       responsible for          policy oversight,
                                    Ministry of                                                         operations and        improving
                                                       agricultural             regulating project                                                     High
                                    Agriculture of the management                                       meeting new           laboratory
                                                                                impacts on natural
                                                                                                        project standards.    capacity and
                                    Republic of        policies                 resources.
                                                                                                                              developing
                                    Uzbekistan                                                                                regulations.
                                                                                                        Improvement of
                                                                                                        the field
                                                                                Supervision as the
                                                                                                        operations and
                                                                                competent
                                                                                                        wildlife health       Enhanced
                                                         Ministry responsible   authority for the
                                    National                                                            monitoring by         infrastructure and
                                                         for environmental      implementation of                                                      High
                                    Committee on                                                        purchasing the        operational
                                                         protection policy      benefit-sharing
                                                                                                        necessary             capacity.
                                    Ecology and                                 plans developed for
                                                                                                        equipment in
                                    Climate Change                              the Project.
                                                                                                        specially protected
                                                                                                        natural areas.
                                                                                                                              One of the main
                                                                                                        Ensuring project
                                                                                                                              implementing
                                                                                National health         compliance with
                                                                                                                              government
                                                                                regulations and         public health
                                                         Responsible for                                                      organizations.
                                                                                public health           standards and
                                                         public health                                                        Main project
                                                                                projects related to     policies
                                                         policies and                                                         impact is
                                                                                environmental
                                                         regulations                                                          strengthened
                                    Ministry of Health                          impact                  Benefit from
                                                                                                                              existing
                                                                                                        renovation and                                 High
                                                                                                                              infrastructure and
                                                                                Maintaining             new equipment,
                                                         Government labs                                                      systems for
                                                                                standards and           and enhanced
                                                         conducting research                                                  improved
                                                                                adopting new            skills from
                                                         and diagnostics on                                                   prevention,
                                                                                operational             training sessions
                                                         public health                                                        detection, and
                                                                                guidelines related to   organized and
                                                                                                                              response to
                                                                                project activities      implemented for
                                                                                                                              infectious
                                                                                                        the protject.
                                                                                                                              diseases.
   Analysis and prioritization of                        Is the responsible
stakeholder groups based on level                        party for the
                                                         implementation of
 of interest and influence on the                        the Project. A Project   National and regional
                                                                                                            Supporting
            project* (2)                                 Implementation Unit      level coordination of
                                                                                                            integrated
                                                                                                            approaches       to
                                    Ministry of          (PIU) will be            public health, animal                         Project
                                                                                                            health and ensuring                             High
                                    Economic and         established under        health, and                                   implementation.
                                                                                                            effective
                                                         the MoFE, which will     environmental
                                    Finance of the       coordinate incoming      factors
                                                                                                            coordination of all
                                    Republic of                                                             sectors
                                                         and outgoing flows of
                                    Uzbekistan           funds, among other
                                                         things.
                                                         Organization                                       Ensuring
                                                                                  Advocating for
                                                         representing civil                                 transparency,         Improved health
                                                                                  environmental
                                    Environmental        interests and                                      accountability, and   and veterinary
                                                                                  causes at local,                                                         Medium
                                    Protection Society   promoting                                          positive              services in the
                                                                                  national, and
                                                         environmental                                      environmental         country.
                                                                                  regional levels
                                                         justice                                            outcomes


                                    Cattle farms                                  These stakeholders                              These stakeholders
                                                                                  play a critical role in                         to benefit from the
                                                         Communities reliant      the formation of          Protecting their      project          with
                                                         on farming and           public opinion            livelihoods and       improved       health
                                                                                                                                                           Medium
                                                         livestock for their      towards the Project       securing better       and        veterinary
                                    Owners and                                    and allowing for the                            services          and
                                                         livelihood                                         resources
                                    shepherds of                                  smooth functioning                              vaccination        for
                                    livestock
                                                                                  of the Project.                                 their livestock.
   Analysis and prioritization of
stakeholder groups based on level   Private legal entities
                                                                                     Supply chain            Maintaining
 of interest and influence on the   and individuals
                                    engaged in the
                                                             Businesses involved     operations, providing   business
            project* (3)            supply of
                                                             in supplying goods      necessary materials     relationships and     Partnership with
                                                                                                                                                        Medium
                                                             and services for the    and services for        ensuring              the project.
                                    machinery,
                                                             project                 project                 compliance with
                                    equipment and
                                                                                     implementation          project
                                    reagents



                                                                                           Other Interested Parties

                                                                                                                                 Greater
                                                                                   A project financing                           development
                                                                                   organization focused                          success and
                                                                                   on the successful         Ensuring            economic stability.
                                                                                   implementation of         transparency,       The World Bank
                                    International            International
                                                                                   the project. Provides     accountability, and will see a solid
                                    Organizations            Financing Institution                                                                       High
                                                                                   technical and             positive social and return on
                                    (World Bank)             financing the Project
                                                                                   advisory support          environmental       investment, both
                                                                                   during the                outcomes.           financially and
                                                                                   implementation of                             socio-economically,
                                                                                   the project.                                  turning funds into
                                                                                                                                 lasting change.

                                                                              Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups

                                                                                                                                   Improved health
                                    Disadvantaged /                                                          Ensuring their
                                                             Disadvantaged /         Inclusive outcomes                            and veterinary
                                    vulnerable                                                               rights and
                                                             vulnerable              and stronger                                  services in the        Low
                                    individuals or                                                           accessibility needs
                                                             individuals or groups   community support.                            country. Project
                                    groups                                                                   are protected
                                                                                                                                   support.

                                    For the purpose of analyzes:
                                    •     Influence: the social group is able to significantly influence the process of Project implementation;
                                    •     Interest: a social group or individuals not necessarily directly affected by the Project may (or may not) show interest in
                                          it;
                                    •     Impact: the implementation of the Project may significantly affect a certain social group (stakeholders).
                                         Methods of stakeholder engagement in the “One Health” program
   Websites         The Project Assessment Document       All stakeholders      Within 2 months      One-on-one    This will be used to solicit views     Vulnerable       Within 2 months
                    (PAD)      and    the     Project                            from the Grant       interviews   and opinions on project impacts      persons, public     from the Grant
                    Implementation Manual (PIM), as                            Agreement Effective                 and solutions.                       organizations,        Agreement
                    well as the Environmental and                                     Date                                                               associations,    Effective Date, and
                    Social Commitment Plan (ESCP),
                                                                                                                                                          NGOs, etc.      throughout Project
                    and the SEP will be published on
                    the official websites of partner
                                                                                                                                                                           implementation
                    ministries and agencies and the
                    World Bank.




Communication       Distribution of reliable project       Government              Quarterly         Workshops     This channel will be used to:        Government         Within 2 months
 via phone and      information     to     government     officials, NGOs,                                         (i) Present project information to   organizations,     from the Grant
  messengers,       officials, organizations, agencies   public associations                                       a group of stakeholders;             NGOs, public         Agreement
correspondence      and companies and invitation of      and development                                           (ii) Allow the group of              organizations,      Effective Date
       by           stakeholders to meetings.                 partners                                             stakeholders to provide their           industry
  email and in                                                                                                     views and opinions;                   associations
     written
                                                                                                                   (iii) Use participatory exercises
      form
                                                                                                                   to facilitate group discussions,
                                                                                                                   brainstorm      issues,    analyze
                                                                                                                   information,      and     develop
Internet/ Digital   Use of the official websites of            Project          Within 3 months                    recommendations               and
     Media          partnering and implementing           stakeholders and        from the Grant                   strategies; and
                    Ministries and Agencies to             other interested    Agreement Effective                 (iv) Recording of responses.
                    promote various information and       parties that have          Date, and
                    updates on the overall Project,         access to the      throughout Project
                    impact assessment and impact         internet resources.     implementation
                    management              process,
                    procurement,        employment
                    opportunities, as well as on
                    Project’s engagement activities
                    with the public.
                                                                                Information disclosure strategy
                  List of                                                                              Monitorin   Quarterly     Bulletin      Stakeholders     Project           Project
  Project                          Method             Target             Topic of        Responsibil
              information to                                                                            g Phase    and Annual    boards,       at the velayat   performance,     Managem
   stage       be disclosed       proposed         Stakeholders        consultation          ity
Preparation   ESCP, SEP        Official          Stakeholders at     Environmental           PIU
                                                                                                                   Performance   velayat       and etrap        GRM, Security,      ent
and Design                     websites          the national,       and Social                                    reports       and etrap     levels           GBV education      Unit
   Phase                                         velayat and         Management,                                                 branches
                                                 etrap levels.       procurement,                                  Environment of the
                                                                     Stakeholder                                   al and Social MoA,
                                                                     engagement.
                               Workshops
                                                                                                                   Audit reports EPM,
                                                 Velayat, etrap,     Project concept,     PIU, MoA,
                                                 and community       method of           EPM, MHMI                               MHMI
                                                 levels              selection of                                  Updates on
                                                                     beneficiary                                   project
                                                                     communities,                                  activities
                                                                     benefits, impact.
                               Public            Community-level     Project concept,     PIU, MoA,
                               discussions and   stakeholders        method of           EPM, MHMI
                               consultations                         selection of
                               with affected                         beneficiary
                               parties                               communities,
                                                                     benefits, impact.
Implementa Environmental       Official          International,      Projects            PIU, MoA,     Completio Project         Institution   All              Project rsults    Project
 tion Phase and Social         websites          national, velayat   benefits,             EPM,          n and   Completion      al            stakeholders                      Managem
            Management                           and etrap level     impacts              MHMI,        Evaluatio Report          completio                                         ent
            Plan (ESMP),                         stakeholders        (Security, GRM,      Project
            Labor                                                    GBV issues and      Manageme
                                                                                                        n Phase                  n reports                                         Unit
            Management                                               mitigation              nt
            Procedure,                                                                      Unit
            Occupational
            Health and
            Safety Plan,
            emergency
            preparedness
            and response

              Project
              Monitoring and
              safeguard
              compliance
              report
                     Proposed Strategy to Incorporate the View of Vulnerable Groups

The principle of inclusiveness will guide the stakeholder engagements, particularly with respect to vulnerable
individuals and groups. In cases where vulnerable status may lead to people’s reluctance or physical incapacity to
participate in large-scale community meetings, the project will hold separate small group discussions with them at
an easily accessible venue. This way, the project will reach out to groups who, under normal circumstances, may
be insufficiently represented at general community gatherings. Some strategies to be adopted to reach out to these
groups include:


• Identify leaders of vulnerable and marginalized groups to reach-out to these groups.
• Maintain a database of marginalized groups through existing sector associations, such as the Association of the
Disabled People, the Society for the Deaf and Dumb, etc.
• Leverage existing health and environmental projects that include vulnerable populations that overlap with this
project to use their systems to identify and engage them.
• Involve community leaders, community organizations, and NGOs working with vulnerable groups.
• Organize face-to-face discussions in focus groups with these population groups.
                                        Resources Required

The project will be funded by a grant of $ 1.79 million US dollars from the Pandemic Fund (which
corresponds to the part of the multi-country project "Pandemic Preparedness and Response through the
“One Health” Approach in Central Asia", for which the World Bank has been designated as the
implementing organization and Uzbekistan as the beneficiary)


The following organizations were identified as implementing agencies:
A. Ministry of Agriculture;
B. National Committee on Ecology and Climate Change;
C. Ministry of Health;
D. National Coordination Structure "One Health";
E. Project Implementation Unit under the Ministry of Economy and Finance.
                                         Project Implementation Arrangements (1)

In order to achieve the objectives of the Project, the implementing agencies will carry out the following activities with the relevant
ministries and stakeholders in the country:
Ministry of Agriculture: The proposed measures are aimed at increasing the capacity of the State Veterinary Service to combat
infectious animal diseases through legislative assessment, improving laboratory capacity and developing regulations. Activities
include:
           • Assessment of the legislative framework;
           • Revision of legislative documents;
           • Improvement of national epidemiological surveillance systems;
           • Purchase of veterinary instruments;
           • Providing field veterinarians with equipment.
National Committee on Ecology and Climate Change: The proposed measures are aimed at improving field operations and
monitoring the health of wild animals by purchasing the necessary equipment. Activities include:
           • Purchase of communication and surveillance equipment for state nature reserves;
           • Purchase of equipment for animal treatment and testing
                                       Project Implementation Arrangements (2)
Ministry of Health: The proposed activities will aim to strengthen epidemiological surveillance capacity for priority zoonotic
diseases (i.e. brucellosis, echinococcosis and rabies) and improve diagnostic coverage and quality in existing public health
laboratories in the country. The proposed measures are aimed at modernizing the system supported by the COVID-19 Response
Project, i.e., Automated Data Management for Sanitary and Epidemiological Surveillance (ADMSES) and diagnostic capabilities
in microbiological and serological laboratories (which were supported by the Avian Influenza Project). Activities include:
    • Purchase of IT-equipment for 95 facilities of the sanitary and epidemiological service of regional significance (including
checkpoints).
    • Purchase of diagnostic supplies and reagents for rapid diagnosis of brucellosis and echinococcosis.
    • Accreditation of central public health laboratories.
National Coordination Structure "One Health" (NCSOH): The “One Health” project will provide support to Uzbekistan in the
creation and implementation of the NCSOH. The main objective of NCSOH is to promote effective intersectoral coordination at
the country (national) level. The NCSOH will include representatives of three line ministries participating in the “One Health”
program (healthcare, agriculture/veterinary and environmental protection), as well as the Ministries of Finance and Economics.
NCSOH will have a Secretariat to manage day-to-day functions to support the implementation of activities within the framework
of the “One Health” Initiative in Uzbekistan. The NCSOH should be established on the basis of a ministerial order or resolution
to fulfill the legal requirement of the World Bank within the framework of this project.


The Ministry of Economy and Finance has been appointed as the responsible party for the implementation of the One Health
Program. A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established under the MEF.
                                 GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM (GRM)

The main objective of the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is to assist in the timely, effective and
efficient handling of grievances and claims on issues related to the implementation of the Project, so that
the result satisfies all stakeholders. In particular, it provides for a transparent and reliable process to achieve
fair, effective and sustainable results. It also helps to build trust and cooperation, which are integral
components of a broader community consultation process that facilitates the implementation of corrective
actions.


In particular, GRM:
• Provides affected people with the opportunity to file a complaint (grievance) or resolve any dispute that
may arise during the implementation of project activities;
• Ensures that appropriate and mutually acceptable corrective measures are identified and implemented
to the satisfaction of the complaining party;
• Avoids the need to go to court.
                     GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM IN UZBEKISTAN (1)

The Grievance Redress Mechanism under the project will be guided by the existing norms and
procedures of the legislation of Uzbekistan governing issues of appeal.
According to the results of a preliminary assessment of the grievance filing and redress systems in
Uzbekistan, it has been revealed that effective mechanisms exist in the country that are accessible to any
person to address and appeal against any actions and omissions of officials, authorities, local governments
and public associations.
                         GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM IN UZBEKISTAN (2)

- As part of the awareness-raising campaigns, the PIU will ensure appropriate staff training and the
availability of the necessary information and experience to conduct telephone consultations and receive
feedback on issues related to the “One Health” program.
- The chain of grievance review actions includes receipt of the grievance, registration, sorting,
processing, confirmation, follow–up, verification, action or forwarding, and feedback.
- To receive grievances, the project will use the systems and channels listed below (hotline, online,
written, mailbox, and telephone complaint channels) to ensure that all information related to the project
is disseminated and complaints and responses are adequately monitored, followed by review and
resolution.
- All grievances which are received by employees of the PIU, the World Bank and other channels for
receiving and collecting grievances are recorded in the registration log, which indicates the type of
grievance, details of the problem, contact details of people, deadline and agreed actions.
- The grievances received are forwarded to the relevant employees of the PIU, for sorting and deciding
on further processing and follow-up. If the grievance falls within the competence of another
organization or ministry (for example, it concerns migration, travel, compensation, etc.), the grievance is
forwarded accordingly. The actions taken or the completion of the response are recorded in the log.
Channels for accessing information on the One               The World Bank Grievance System:
Health project and submitting grievances to the PIU:
                                                            •   E-mail: grievances@worldbank.org
•   Central Hotline: +99871 203 00 50;                      •   Fax: +1.202.614.7313
•   E-mail:                                                 •   Incoming mail received: The World Bank, Grievance
•   Oral or written grievances received during work             Redress Service, MSN MC10-1018, 1818 H Street
    meetings and personal reception;                            Northwest, Washington, DC 20433, USA
•   Incoming correspondence delivered by courier to         •   Through the World Bank Representative Office in
    the PIU at the MEF of Uzbekistan;                           the country: Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
•   Incoming mail received: Uzbekistan                      •   Telephone:
•   The contact phone number of the public reception        •   E-mail:
    of the PIU: +998 90 975 57 27;
•   Feedback link on the MEF of Uzbekistan
    website:


    Anonymous grievances are also accepted through any of these channels. In addition, there is a special window
    for handling complaints related to Gender-Based Violence, and all appeals should be considered separately
    and remain completely confidential.
                                RECEIVING OF GRIEVANCES
Upon receiving a grievance related to the project, the following points are determined:

•   Type of grievance;
•   Grievance category;
•   Persons responsible for examining and reviewing the grievance;
•   The time limit for reviewing the grievance;
•   Coordinated actions.

After determining the type of grievance, the responsible person registers the detailed information
in the appropriate correspondence journal. The person who filed the grievance receives a
notification by phone or e-mail about the following:

• Full name of the contractor to whom the grievance was sent;
• Review period (no more than 30 days from the date of registration, in case of an emergency,
  appropriate measures are taken within 5 working days);
• The relevant deadlines and actions are determined in accordance with the instructions of the
  PIU at the MEF of Uzbekistan on handling grievances.
                                          NOTIFICATION
The notification is recorded in the outgoing correspondence log. The specialist of the PIU at the MEF of
Uzbekistan responsible for grievances will ensure proper handling of the grievance.
If the person who filed the grievance is not satisfied with the decision taken as a result of the
consideration of the grievance, he has the right to appeal such a decision. The application for appeal is
considered by the Head/Project Coordinator or PIU specialists. After reviewing the appeal application,
if the citizen/beneficiary is not satisfied with the decision, he/she has the right to appeal against such
decision or apply to the grievances system, as indicated in Section 5.1 of this Plan.

In addition, Grievance Committees will have a special window to address issues related to sexual- based
violence and sexual abuse/harassment (SBV/SH). In order to ensure effective functioning, the PIU assists
in:

(i) raising awareness among workers and communities;
(ii) ensuring that relevant stakeholders understand what can and should not be done; and
(iii) providing information on ways to report cases of SBV/SH; and
(iv) the development of protocols to address issues, taking into account the sensitivity of the
      communication and respect for the confidentiality of the data of the affected persons.
                          Monitoring and Reporting on Grievances
The contact persons for filing a complaint with the PIU at the MEF of Uzbekistan and the World Bank are
responsible for:

•   Collection and analysis of high-quality data received from a Grievance Liaison Specialist on the
    number, content and status of grievances, and uploading them to a single project database;
•   Monitoring unresolved issues and proposing measures to resolve them;
•   Preparation of quarterly reports on the mechanisms of the GRM for submission to the World Bank.

The quarterly reports for the World Bank will include a section related to the GRM containing updated
information of the following nature:

•   The status of the implementation of the GRM (procedures, training, public awareness campaigns,
    budgeting, etc.);
•   qualitative data on the number of grievances received (applications, suggestions, complaints,
    requests, positive feedback), with a separate indication of grievances related to forced relocation and
    the number of resolved grievances, if any;
•   Quantitative data on the type of grievances and responses to them, questions submitted, and
    grievances that remain unresolved;
•   the level of satisfaction with the measures taken (response);
•   Corrective measures taken.
                                    World Bank Grievance Redress System
Communities and individuals who believe that a project         The grievance must clearly indicate the adverse impact(s)
supported by the World Bank has had an adverse impact          allegedly or allegedly incurred in connection with the
on them can also file a grievance directly with the Bank       implementation of a project supported by the World Bank. It is
through      the    Bank's    Grievance      Service   (GS).   necessary to attach the available documents and
(http://projects-beta.worldbank.org/en/projects-               correspondence, if possible. The person who filed the grievance
operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-            may also indicate the desired outcome of the grievance. Finally,
service ). A grievance can be filed in English, Turkmen or     the grievance must include the person(s) who filed the
Russian languages, although additional time will be            grievance, or their designated representatives, and contact
required to consider grievances filed in languages other       information. Grievance filed through the GS are dealt with
than English. A grievance can be submitted to the Bank's       promptly, which provides an opportunity to respond quickly to
GS through the following channels:                             problems related to the project.

•   E-mail: grievances@worldbank.org                           In addition, communities and individuals affected by the project
•   Fax: +1.202.614.7313                                       can file a grievance with the World Bank's Independent
•   Mail: The World Bank, Grievance Redress Service, MSN       Inspectorate, which determines whether harm has been caused
    MC10-1018, 1818 H Street Northwest, Washington,            or could have been caused as a result of the World Bank's
    DC 20433, USA                                              failure to comply with its policies and procedures. A grievance
•   Through the World Bank Representative Office in the        can be filed with the Independent Inspectorate at any time after
    country: in Ashgabat, the UN Building, Archabil            the World Bank has been notified of the relevant issues and
    Avenue 21, 744036, Ashgabat, Uzbekistan. Tel.              after the World Bank Management has been given the
    +993 12 487450, ashgabat@worldbank.org                     opportunity to respond to it. To get information on how to file a
                                                               grievance with the World Bank's Independent Inspectorate,
                                                               follow the link: www.inspectionpanel.org
              Step 1. Submission (Day 0–1)

                          ⬇
Step 2. Registration & Acknowledgement (within 3 days)

                           ⬇
         Step 3. Sorting & Assignment (Day 3–5)

                           ⬇
  Step 4. Investigation & Corrective Action (Day 5–20)
                                                              PROJECT GRM PROCESS FLOW (CHART)
                         ⬇
Step 5. Response & Feedback to Complainant (Day 20–30)

                           ⬇
Step 6. Appeal / Escalation (immediately after decision, if
                       unsatisfied)

                          ⬇
Step 7. Closure & Reporting (Quarterly aggregation & WB
                       reporting)
                                    MONITORING AND REPORTING

Monitoring and tracking interactions with stakeholders is important to ensure effective continuous
communication and follow-up, as well as to minimize omissions and monitor the fulfillment of
important commitments. The “One Health” program will keep a log of interactions with stakeholders,
which records all completed or planned interactions with stakeholders. The interaction log includes
information about the location and dates of meetings, seminars, and discussions, as well as a
description of the parties affected by the project and other stakeholders consulted. The monitoring
reports submitted to the PIU and the Bank will include logs of interaction with stakeholders, as well as
feedback from the GRM. This may also include, for example, information on how the Ministry
implementing the project responded to concerns raised, how these responses were communicated to
those consulted, details of outstanding issues and any planned follow-up actions. The annual reporting
on the SEP will be part of the project monitoring report.


The project will also develop an evaluation form to assess the effectiveness of each formal interaction
process. The questions will be written in such a way that they are suitable for the appropriate audience.
Involvement of Stakeholders in Monitoring Activities
Project Implementation Group will oversee the implementation of the SEP. The Environmental and Social
Affairs Specialist, together with the Project Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, will monitor the
implementation of this Stakeholder Engagement Plan in accordance with the requirements of the legal
agreement, including the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). The team will monitor and
document any commitments or actions agreed upon during the consultation, including changes resulting
from changes to the project structure or the ESCP.


Data for monitoring beneficiaries, businesses, associations, and organizations, as well as training service
providers, will be collected through self-reporting, according to a schedule, and using standardized forms and
procedures. Information from these beneficiaries will also be collected during monitoring visits by employees
of ministries and implementing agencies.



Reporting to Stakeholder Groups
Reports for stakeholder groups will be compiled in various ways, including annual national performance
review meetings for all implementing agencies. Through the planned communication channels, the results of
the project will be disseminated to stakeholders at the national and subnational levels.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR ATTENTION!
                        MINUTES OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTATIONS

                            MINUTES OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTATIONS
                                         Uzbekistan “One Health” Project for Pandemic Prevention, Food
 A     Project Title:
                                               Systems Resilience, and Ecosystem Health (P512354)
                                         MHMI, MEF, Local governments, the Society for Environmental
  B    Stakeholder Title:                  Protection, the Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs,
                                                       owners and shepherds of livestock
Note: This document provides a working summary of the main facts captured during the
consultation/ key informant interview held and should not be treated as formal minutes. It is
therefore deliberately not exhaustive or chronological. Its purpose is to record significant
information/ feedback and not intended for official review or approval.
        Basic details:                                 Public Consultations of the Project
                                         Tashkentt, Building of the Ministry of Economy and Finance
  C    Location:
                                                               of Uzbekistan
       Date:                                                  February 24, 2026
       Attended BY: (Attendance List is attached)
 D
       Full Name                        Organization                    Designation
       Purpose of Consultation:

  E    1. Presentation of the project to the stakeholders 2. Disclosure of information about the
       project 3. Presentation of the SEP and the ESCP. 4. Receiving feedback from stakeholders on
       the implementation of the project.

       Key Points Discussed: (Agenda is attached)
       1. “One Health” Project. 2. ESCP 3. SEP 4. GRM

       Key concern and suggestion expressed by Stakeholders:
           1. 11:00 – In her opening speech, the Head of the Consolidated Department of Public
              Finance and Economic Policy of the MEF of Uzbekistan, Ms. Galina Romanova,
              welcomed and thanked all participants in the public consultations and outlined the
              goals and objectives of the One Health Project in Uzbekistan.
           2. 11:15 – The EPM specialist, Mr. A. Kajarov, asked to clarify the contact persons from
              the PIU (MEF) with whom it will be necessary to communicate during the planning
              and implementation of the One Health Project in Uzbekistan.
              The Chief Specialist of the International Department of the MEF, Mr. Durdydev S.,
  F           explained that he and Mr. Mammetgulyev M., who is also the chief specialist of the
              international department of the MEF, are such persons.
           3. 11:30 – Mr. A. Kajarov and the regional coordinator for the development of the One
              Health Action Plan in Central Asia (CAREC), Ms. M. Chommadova, asked to clarify
              whether it is necessary to develop the relevant Plans mentioned in the ESCP and the
              SEP, such as an Emergency Response Plan, a Waste Management Plan, and an
              Environmental and Social Management Plan separately for each beneficiary
              (ministry), or you can use existing relevant plans.
              The World Bank's specialist in the field of environmental protection, Ms.
              Zhurumbetova Zh. explained that the PIU specialists would develop general plans for
              the Project as a whole, while for each individual activity (including procurement), the
              beneficiary should develop its own specific plan for this activity, including a
              Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). It was also noted that the ESMP
              is included in the tender documentation for the selection of suppliers..
       4. 11:40 – Mr. Kajarov A. asked to clarify the personnel selection procedure to the PIU,
          and Ms. Chommadova M. noted the absence of a healthcare specialist in the PIU.
          Mr. Durdyev explained that a competition will be held to select personnel/specialists
          for the PIU. He also explained that, if necessary, it is planned to involve additional
          experts/consultants on a short-term basis. Mr. Durdyev noted that the PIU will act as
          a Project Coordinator and work closely with the beneficiaries of the Project, he also
          asked stakeholders to actively participate in the Project. The issue of developing
          appropriate plans will be considered at the next meeting of the National Coordination
          Structure "One Health", which includes all beneficiaries of the Project, as well as the
          MEF/PIU.
       5. 12:05 – All interested parties asked to clarify what exactly will be purchased as part of
          the Project.
          Mr. Durdyev explained that a Procurement Plan is being created, agreed with all
          interested parties, according to which the necessary funds will be purchased. Mr.
          Durdyev also explained the procurement procedure and that the Procurement Plan
          may change as needed by stakeholders and in agreement with the World Bank. All
          changes in the Procurement Plan should be reflected in the SEP.
       6. The representative of the MHMI, Ms. M. Chommadova, asked to consider the
          possibility of accreditation of the laboratory by an international company without
          holding a tender.
          Mr. Durdyev agreed to consider this issue according to the Procurement Plan.
       7. 12:40 – In conclusion, Mr. Durdyev thanked all interested parties for participating in
          these public consultations and asked them to actively participate in the
          implementation of the One Health Project in Uzbekistan.

G   Minutes was prepared by: Azamat Allaniyazov               Date: February 24, 2026
                                                STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES LOG
                                                    «One Health» Project In Uzbekistan

Sr.                                            Location and         Purpose of        Key outcomes       Number of participants
       Stakeholder Groups       Date                                                                                              Reference to records
No.                                               Venue            Engagement          and Actions          (male/female)

 1    1) Ministry of          February 24,   Tashkent, Building         Public             Public            10 (men – 8,
      Agriculture (MoA)        2026          of the Ministry of   Consultations of   Consultations of         women - 2)
      2) National                              Economy and        the ESCP and SEP      the Project,
      Committee          on                      Finance of        of “One Health”       including
      Ecology and Climate                        Uzbekistan             Project      discussion of the
      Change (NCECC)                                                                  ESCP, SEP and
      3) Ministry of Health                                                                GRM.
      4) Ministry of
      Economy and
      Finance (MEF)
      5) Environmental
      Protection Society
      6) Livestock owners
      and shepherds
Photo report on the public consultations held in the building of the Ministry of Economy and Finance of Uzbekistan on February
                                                            24, 2026
             Presentation of the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan and Stakeholders Engagement Plan
         Uzbekistan “One Health” Project for Pandemic Prevention, Food Systems Resilience, and Ecosystem Health.




                                                                                                         Page 1 of 3
Page 2 of 3
Page 3 of 3
Page 4 of 3
Page 5 of 3
