Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Regional Acceleration Project Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For A Sustainable Economy Multi-phase
                                        Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                               Concept Stage
Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                        (ESRS Concept Stage)

  Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 10/06/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05218




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 13, 2026                                                                                                    Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For A Sustainable Economy Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P512975                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        RISE-RAP                    2026

                     Operation Name            Regional Acceleration Project under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy
                                               Multi-Phase Approach (RISE-RAP)

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Eastern and Southern      Angola, Burundi, Congo, Democratic        EASTERN AND                 Water
                     Africa                    Republic of, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Kenya,   SOUTHERN AFRICA
                                               Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi,
                                               Mozambique, Rwanda, Somalia,
                                               Federal Republic of, South Africa,
                                               South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania,
                                               Uganda, Zambia

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date



Public Disclosure
                     AUDA-NEPAD                AUDA-NEPAD                                03-Feb-2026                 31-Mar-2026


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     09-Sep-2025               10,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity of participating countries to accelerate and
                     improve irrigated agriculture-related policies and investments.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities


                    Jan 13, 2026                                                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For A Sustainable Economy Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                     The Regional Acceleration Project is supportive to the program objective for Africa RISE MPA to to accelerate access to
                     and performance of irrigated agriculture services and market linkages in participating countries in Eastern and Southern
                     Africa. The Project will support countries across Africa RISE components through facilitating country-facing acceleration
                     activities on learning and knowledge, regional alignment and cooperation, and implementation and innovation. It
                     supports innovation in support to Farmer-Led Irrigation Development, Performance in public service delivery and water
                     security, and addresses the constraints of fragmented, single-project interventions by enabling alignment, shared
                     delivery models, capacity enhancement and stronger partnerships across countries.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Africa RISE-RAP is structured in three complementary components: (i) Regional framework for coordinated policy action,
                     harmonization, benchmarking and country exchange; (ii) National and regional scaling support – to support the
                     technical implementation capacity enhancement at regional and national levels, aligned with country policy and
                     investment plans; and (iii) Learning and adaptive management. The Program Development Objective for RISE-RAP is to
                     strengthen the capacity of Africa RISE-participating countries in Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) to accelerate
                     effective implementation and improve performance of irrigation-related policies and investments. The project operates
                     in the rural contexts and is designed to be inclusive of fragile, conflict-affected, and vulnerable (FCV) settings. Its
                     regional approach means it will engage a diverse array of stakeholders, including national and regional government
                     agencies, research institutions, the private sector, NGOs, and potentially affected communities, such as Indigenous
                     Peoples and other marginalized groups. The project’s design leverages existing country-led platforms and regional
                     bodies (notably AUDA-NEPAD, AU-SAFGRAD and IWMI (CGIAR) ), ensuring that interventions are contextually relevant



Public Disclosure
                     and aligned with national priorities. While the program will be implemented in the entire region with diverse
                     environmental and social settings, it will not have direct physical footprint, given focus on institutional capacities and
                     fostering collaboration across countries.
                     However, the frameworks, standards, and tools developed under the project will shape future investments, which could
                     have significant downstream impacts. These may include potential effects on biodiversity, land use, and local
                     livelihoods, especially in ecologically sensitive or high-biodiversity areas.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The program will be implementation through the African Union Framework for Irrigation Development and Agricultural
                     Water Management to leverage strategic institutional partnerships with NEPAD, CGIAR-International Water
                     Management Institute, and regional academic institutions. Africa Union Development Agency (AUDA)-NEPAD will lead
                     overall program coordination, policy dialogue, alignment with the African Union Framework, benchmarking, and
                     regional collaboration. The International Water Management Institute (IWMI) of CGIAR will be the main Technical
                     Support Partner, working with regional development institutes, technical training centers, and universities, to provide
                     technical assistance, tools, and capacity-building to support robust implementation at both national and regional levels.
                     Regional and global academic networks and research centers, to be defined at later stage, will be the learning and
                     capacity partner to drive applied research, training, and adaptive management and support ongoing learning, and helps
                     monitor progress for continuous improvement.
                     AUDA-NEPAD has experience with Bank funded projects. In the last 7 years, the World Bank and AUDA-NEPAD, through
                     the AU-Semi-Arid Food Grains Research and Development Agency (AU-SAFGRAD) as a specialized technical office of the

                    Jan 13, 2026                                                                                                     Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For A Sustainable Economy Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                     AU have partnered on high level policy advocacy through regional development dialogue, benchmarking and training.
                     AUDA-NEPAD implemented Southern Africa Tuberculosis and Health Systems Support Project (P155658) under
                     safeguards which closed in June 2024 with moderately satisfactory performance. AU also has experience with ESF under
                     the ongoing FSRP-P177816, with current satisfactory performance. Similarly, IWMI has experience in operating in
                     accordance with the ESF, as well as national laws and regulations of countries of implementation e.g. under AICCRA-
                     P173398, which has been active since 2021 with consistent highly satisfactory ES performance in the last one year.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Moderate
                     The nature of activities to be financed under Africa RISE-RAP include regional policy dialogue and technical assistance
                     activities including (i) establishing a regional framework for coordinated policy action, harmonization, benchmarking
                     and country exchange under Component 1, (ii) under Component 2, providing technical implementation capacity
                     enhancement at regional and national levels, aligned with country policy and investment plans for implementing
                     Africa RISE Initiative, and (iii) under Component 3, offering a regional platform for academic learning, knowledge and
                     peer exchange, advocacy, communication, thereby connecting the national programs and providing the platform for
                     learning and accelerated implementation. No civil work is envisaged under this program, but later under individual
                     country programs which will be assessed separately. The policy dialogues and TA activities are unlikely to create
                     significant direct or indirect environmental risks or impacts to the biophysical environment or the institutional



Public Disclosure
                     stakeholders or other potentially affected parties at the regional and local levels. Low to moderate negative impacts
                     and risks are expected, primarily associated with the generation of electronic waste from acquiring and operating
                     data center hardware for the MIS, marginal increased energy usage in offices including the regional hub/data center,
                     and occupational hazards related to ergonomic conditions for project workers both in office settings and from work-
                     related travels. The TA type activities, including for irrigation programs and investment plans, will be undertaken in
                     compliance with the World Bank’s ESSs, with the specific terms of references (TORs) agreed on with the Bank and
                     duly incorporating relevant requirements of the ESSs. Given the envisaged low to moderate magnitude of the
                     environmental risks, the implementing entities experience with Bank standards and past performance, the
                     environmental risk rating is considered Moderate.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project is structured around technical assistance, policy harmonization, capacity building, knowledge sharing, and
                     planning. The project does not directly finance civil works, land acquisition, or investments with immediate physical
                     impacts. However, its outputs—such as policies, plans, and standards—may be adopted and implemented by
                     governments or other actors, potentially leading to significant downstream social impacts, including for example
                     conflict among water users and disputes over water allocation between farmers and other users which could cause
                     local tensions. This project is not financing the implementation of such outputs, as that is outside of the project scope
                     but considerations of the downstream risks will be included in the TA activities’ TORs and products in line with the ESF
                     provisions. The project's risks include: i) risks of unfair treatment, discrimination, and non-compliance with labor
                     standards among project's workers under ESS 2; ii) occupational health and safety (OHS) concerns, especially for



                    Jan 13, 2026                                                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For A Sustainable Economy Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                     those involved in fieldwork, data collection, or training activities; iii) risks of sexual exploitation, abuse, and
                     harassment (SEA/SH) in connection with fieldwork, data collection and training activities; iv) potential exclusion of
                     vulnerable groups—including women, ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities, and individuals living in remote
                     areas—from consultation/participation activities and fully accessing and benefiting from project interventions; v) the
                     reforms may increase the cost of water for irrigation or alter access to resources for vulnerable and low-income
                     groups; vi) a risk of elites’ capture of the reform rather than reaching smallholders or marginalized communities. A
                     comprehensive SEP will be prepared and implemented to ensure meaningful and inclusive consultations. In addition,
                     Labor management procedures, inclusive of GRM and OHS measures will be detailed in the ESCP and further
                     elaborated in the Project Operation Manual.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The project’s primary focus is on technical assistance, policy harmonization, and capacity building at both regional
                      and national levels, it does have direct and downstream E&S implications. The overall E&S risk is rated as Substantial,
                      reflecting the complexity of multi-country coordination, institutional capacities, and the potential for future
                      investments shaped by the project outputs. The Project will prepare a regional Strategic Environmental and Social
                      Assessment (SESA) to integrate E&S considerations in the coordinated investment framework under component 1.
                      Outputs of TA may recommend actions to improve existing irrigation facilities or new investments with potential



Public Disclosure
                      interaction with Associated Infrastructure facilities. Where involved, the Associated facilities will need to meet the
                      ESF requirements. The TA activities will be undertaken in compliance with the ESF, including SESA preparation, with
                      the specific TORs subject to prior review and clearance by the Bank.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure shall be at the heart of the Program and are envisaged as a
                      continuous, ongoing process throughout its lifecycle. This will ensure participation, inclusiveness and transparency to
                      realize cross-country collaboration and adoption of aligned policies. Details of the stakeholder engagement activities
                      will be outlined in the Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEP) to be prepared by AUDA-NEPAD in line with ESS 10,
                      integrated in the ESCP and will be disclosed prior to appraisal. Main stakeholders will include: participating
                      governments and their agencies; regional agriculture and water research institutions; colleges/universities; farmers
                      private sector, INGO and individual beneficiaries of learning exchange and scholarship programs. The SEP will include
                      a GM to address complaints and suggestions coming from both beneficiaries and other interested parties, inclusive of
                      confidential and appropriate mechanisms for handling SEA/SH cases.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      Both direct (from AU agencies and partners) and contracted workers (consultants) will be involved in the program to
                      undertake office-based work, fieldwork and data collection as well as training activities. Potential labor risks include
                      unfair treatment and discrimination based on gender and other social factors, in the selection of project training


                    Jan 13, 2026                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For A Sustainable Economy Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                      facilitators and capacity-building programs, non-compliance with labor standards among project staff, consultants,
                      and other relevant parties, and travels into insecure locations exposing workers to security risks. Given the technical
                      nature of activities, minimal to no risks of child labor or forced labor is foreseen. All direct and contracted workers will
                      be formally employed and guided by labor management procedures in line with the provisions of ESS2 to be detailed
                      in the ESCP and elaborated in the POM, inclusive of workers' grievance mechanism and measures for ensuring OHS as
                      well as preventing SEA/SH.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                Relevant

                      The Program involves mainly policy dialogues and TA activities that are not envisaged to result in consumption of
                      significant quantities of energy, water or raw materials or emission of significant quantities of greenhouse gases.
                      However, office-based activities as well as operation of regional MIS hub will result in generation of both general and
                      e-wastes. The ESCP will highlight the protocol for management of wastes generated in line with ESF requirements and
                      WBG EHS Guidelines. For type-2 TA activities of the project, the ESCP will include requirements for SESA,
                      incorporating relevant ESS3 requirements.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      There is direct community health and safety risk related to implementation particularly applied research (C3) and
                      downstream planning (C2). Applied research will : i) increase the risk of communicable diseases; ii) road safety
                      hazards;iii) involve use of armed security in FCV locations to guard/escort workers, with potential impacts on both
                      workers and the communities in host locations; and iv) increase SEA/SH during community interactions. The




Public Disclosure
                      downstream impact, mainly of Component 2, may potentially increase competition for water resources—such as
                      between upstream and downstream users, or between agricultural and non-agricultural needs—can lead to social
                      conflict and poorly managed irrigation can increase prevalence of water-borne diseases due to standing water and
                      can exacerbate tensions over water allocation. The TA activities will be undertaken in compliance with ESF. The
                      project will plan and implement robust health and safety protocols, including codes of conduct for all workers

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                     Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS5 is not directly relevant to the RISE-RAP project, as the project does not finance activities that would require land
                      acquisition, impose restrictions on land use, or result in involuntary resettlement. All project activities are limited to
                      technical assistance, capacity building, policy development, and knowledge sharing, with no direct support for civil
                      works or infrastructure investments. However, the project’s outputs—such as regional frameworks, investment plans,
                      and technical tools—may inform or guide future investments in irrigation and agricultural water management, which
                      could potentially involve land acquisition or resettlement. These risks will be addressed through the SESA, and will be
                      integrated into the Terms of Reference (TORs) of the TA activities in line with the ESF.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                      Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project's activities will have no ecological foot print. However, implementation of TA outputs without adequate
                      safeguards may contribute to habitat loss, decline/loss in biodiversity and ecosystem services, if resultant policies and
                      plans encourage the conversion of natural habitats (wetlands, forests) to irrigated agriculture or promote expansion


                    Jan 13, 2026                                                                                                          Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For A Sustainable Economy Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                      of irrigation into areas that threaten endangered species and disrupt ecological balances. The relevance of ESS6 will
                      be reassessed during implementation as more detail on potential downstream investments becomes available.
                      Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be conducted to ensure that these risks are identified and
                      managed in line with the mitigation hierarchy in the ESF.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                             Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is relevant to this project, as populations in several participating countries meet the criteria for Indigenous
                      Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities (IP/SSAHUTLCs). The TA
                      activities are not expected to have direct impacts on IP/SSAHUTLC, however, the ToR and outputs for any policy
                      dialogues, studies, capacity building, training and any other technical assistance activities, including the SESA, under
                      the Program will need to be undertaken in line with ESS7 The SEP will have a dedicated section to ensure that there is
                      adequate stakeholder engagement with these groups in the participating countries where they are present and
                      culturally appropriate grievance mechanisms so that their feedback can inform the TA under this project, where
                      relevant.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                         Not Currently Relevant

                      The TA activities will not have impacts on physical cultural heritage. However, the future investments resulting from
                      the outputs may intersect with sites of cultural or traditional significance. The TA activities will be undertaken in
                      compliance with the ESF by fully incorporating relevant requirements of ESS 8 into the TOR for such TA activities and




Public Disclosure
                      in the SESA.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             No



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       No other financing partners are currently envisioned.




                    Jan 13, 2026                                                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Regional Acceleration Project Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For A Sustainable Economy Multi-phase
                               Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Instruments to be completed prior to Appraisal
                     1. Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) covering AUDA-NEPAD’s and IWMI’s E&S commitments, and
                     including labor management elements.
                     2. Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including Grievance Mechanism, covering AUDA-NEPAD’s stakeholders and
                     activities, with a record of the stakeholder engagement activities carried out before appraisal.

                     Actions/Instruments expected during the implementation of the program, to be defined in the project’s ESCP:
                     1. Labor management procedures (to be included in the project's operational manual, and labor management
                     elements included in the ESCP).
                     2. Establish and ensure Occupational Health and Safety Protocols and the functionality of workers’ GM are
                     implemented throughout the implementation period, in accordance with the timeframes to be defined in the ESCP.
                     3. The TORs of all technical assistance activities under the Program will be reviewed by the Bank to ensure consistency
                     with the ESF.
                     4. To address any potential downstream E&S risks and impacts of programs and investment plans resulting from the TA
                     activities, SESA will be completed and disclosed before rolling out the plans/program’s implementation at the county
                     level.
                     5. SEA/SH Prevention and Action Plan




Public Disclosure
                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Pieter Waalewijn                       Title:          Lead Water Resources Management
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  pwaalewijn@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Si Gou                                 Job Title:      Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  sgou@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Jeren Kabayeva                         Job Title:      Senior Agriculture Specialist

                      Email:                  jkabayeva@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT



                    Jan 13, 2026                                                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For A Sustainable Economy Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                 Pieter Waalewijn, Si Gou, Jeren Kabayeva

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                        Aggrey Ochieng Kwadha

                     ADM Social Specialist:                               Tatiana Tassoni




Public Disclosure




                    Jan 13, 2026                                                                                                    Page 9 of 9
