Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Hainan Coastal Ecosystem Restoration and Protection PforR Program(P512663)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Sep-2025 | Report No: PIDPC00204




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Hainan Coastal Ecosystem Restoration and Protection PforR Program(P512663)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                     Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                                                       Hainan Coastal Ecosystem
China                          EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC      P512663                      Restoration and Protection
                                                                                       PforR Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
                                                                                       Environment, Natural
Program-for-Results
                               02-Feb-2026                15-May-2026                  Resources & the Blue
Financing (PforR)
                                                                                       Economy
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Hainan Provincial
The People's Republic of
                               Department of Natural
China
                               Resources and Planning

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The Proposed Program Development Objectives (PDO) is to restore priority coastal ecosystems and reduce their
degradation threats in selected regions of Hainan Province.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           No

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                  700.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                     700.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                     699.42
    Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                                                           0.57
  Total Financing                                                                                          700.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00



                                                                                                                Page 1



                                                                                                        Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Hainan Coastal Ecosystem Restoration and Protection PforR Program(P512663)


  FINANCING
     Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                                                     230.00
       World Bank Lending                                                                                                                                 230.00
     Total Government Contribution                                                                                                                        470.00


  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Global and Country Context

1. Coastal regions and their ecosystems are vital to global economic prosperity and human well-being. Over 40 percent
   of the world's population lives in coastal areas, where population density is twice the global average. These densely
   populated and economically dynamic regions depend heavily on the wide range of ecosystem services provided by
   coastal ecosystems, encompassing various habitats such as mangrove forests, coral reefs, salt marshes, seagrass beds,
   and sand dunes. These ecosystems are vital for human well-being, providing crucial services for local benefits like
   shoreline protection, nutrient cycling, and fostering diverse fisheries.

2. In addition, coastal ecosystems also provide a range of global public goods. Despite covering only 0.5 percent of the
   ocean’s surface, coastal ecosystems, particularly mangroves, seagrass beds and salt marshes store nearly 70 percent
   of its carbon, making them critical 'blue carbon' sink in the fight against climate change. These ecosystems sequester
   carbon at rates up to five to ten times higher than terrestrial forests, while also providing critical habitats for
   endangered species and serving as vital stopover and wintering grounds for migratory birds. According to the United
   Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the annual global value of the services provided by coastal and marine
   ecosystems is estimated at around USD30 billion.

3. Nevertheless, coastal ecosystems are severely degraded globally, highlighting the critical need for immediate,
   integrated restoration and conservation efforts. Due to human activities, only about 15 percent of global coastal
   areas remain intact. For example, seagrass meadows of the size of a soccer field are lost every 30 minutes, amounting
   to 7 percent global loss annually. The rate of loss is comparable to that of tropical rainforests. The degradation of
   coastal ecosystems is eroding the essential services they provide. A recent study showed that over the last 30 years,
   the degradation of coastal ecosystems was the primary driver of 1.4 million people annually losing the natural
   protection they previously enjoyed. 1

4. Coastal areas in China hold strategic importance for the country, epitomizing concentrated economic and
   demographic significance. China has more than 18,000 kilometers of mainland coastline and 14,000 kilometers of

1 Hulsen et al. (2023) Global protection from tropical cyclones by coastal ecosystems – past, present, and under climate change. Environmental Research Letters. 18,

124023. [link]


                                                                                                                                                                Page 2



                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Hainan Coastal Ecosystem Restoration and Protection PforR Program(P512663)


        island coastline, ranking among the longest globally. The 11 coastal provinces cover just 14 percent of China's land
        area but are home to 45 percent of the national population and contribute more than half (53 percent) of national
        Gross Domestic Product (GDP). To contextualize their scale: China’s coastal regions alone generate a GDP and support
        a population that would each rank third globally if compared against other countries. Furthermore, over 70 percent
        of China's medium-to-large cities are located in coastal regions.

5. However, this economic momentum has come at a steep ecological cost, leading to the severe degradation of
   coastal ecosystems. Since the 1950s, coastal ecosystems in China have suffered significant losses: 57 percent of
   coastal wetlands, 73 percent of mangroves, and most seagrass beds have disappeared. Coral cover decreased from
   over 30 percent to less than 10 percent on average from 2004 to 2018.2 The percentage of natural coastline decreased
   from nearly 70 percent to just above 40 percent from 1990 to 20203 and about 60 percent of the sandy coastlines in
   China are highly vulnerable to coastal erosion. 4 Loss of coastal ecosystems results from human activities such as
   habitat destruction (mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass) and pollution (plastics, nutrients, chemicals), compounded by
   climate change impacts (sea-level rise, warming, acidification). Since 1980, ecosystem services provided by coastal
   ecosystems in China are estimated to have decreased by USD6.8 billion over the last four decades.5

6. Implementing and gaining knowledge from restoring and protecting coastal ecosystems in an integrated manner in
   China holds significant global relevance. The coastal challenges China faces are shared by many other countries,
   positioning it as a potential pioneer in developing scalable restoration solutions and integrated management models.
   By advancing integrated approach to restore coastal ecosystems and leverage them as nature-based solutions (NbS)
   for climate mitigation and adaptation, as well as biodiversity conservation, China could reshape its own ecological
   trajectory while contributing valuable insights to global efforts toward sustainable coastal development.

    Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program

7. Restoring and protecting its valuable coastal ecosystem has been a priority for the Government of China (GoC), as
   underscored in various national policy documents and initiatives. In 2020, the GoC issued the Master Plan for
   National Key Ecosystem Protection and Restoration Major Projects (2021–2035) (Master Plan), which sets out national
   ecosystem restoration priorities through 2035. The coastal belt is designated as one of seven priority eco-regions for
   restoration and protection6. The Plan calls for a ‘watershed-to-coast’ or ‘ridge-to-reef’ integrated approach to coastal
   ecosystem management. It outlines three priority areas for action: (a) restoration and protection of critical
   ecosystems; (b) reduction of pollution from both land-based and sea-based sources; and (c) leveraging ecosystems for
   biodiversity conservation and ecosystem-based climate actions. Between 2016 and 2023, the central government
   provided over USD3 billion in financial support for coastal ecosystem restoration and conservation efforts, resulting
   in restoration of nearly 1,680 kilometers of coastline and over 50,000 hectares of coastal wetlands nationwide.
   According to a Survey in 2022, China’s mangrove area reached 29,200 hectares – increase by 7,200 hectares since the
   early 2000s - making it one of the few countries globally to achieve a net gain in mangrove coverage.

8. As China’s southernmost island province, Hainan hosts the richest and most unique coastal ecosystems among all
   provinces and is one of the country’s most biodiverse regions. Covering 33,900 km² of land area, Hainan Island has a

2
    Kimura et al. (2022) Status and trends of East Asian Coral Reefs: 1983-2019. Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network. [link]
3 Li et al. (2023) Analysis of China’s coastline changes during 1990 – 2020. Remote Sensing, 15(4), 981. [link]
4 Xiao et al. (2024) Assessment of Beach Vulnerability to Coastal Erosion in China Considering Protective Measures in Beach Area. [link]
5 Yan, F., Wang, X., & Su, F. (2020). Ecosystem service changes in response to mainland coastline movements in China: Process, pattern, and trade-off. Ecological

Indicators, 116, 106337. [link]
6 The seven priority eco-regions include: Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, Yellow River Basin, Yangtze River Basin, Northeast Forest Shelterbelt, Northern Sand Control Shelterbelt,

Southern Hill and Mountainous Areas, and Coastal Zone. [link]


                                                                                                                                                                    Page 3



                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
              The World Bank
              Hainan Coastal Ecosystem Restoration and Protection PforR Program(P512663)


      coastline stretching 1,944 kilometers - accounting for little over one-tenth of China’s mainland coastline. Its coastal
      ecosystems are both diverse and ecologically valuable. It is home to about 30 percent of China’s seagrass beds (over
      70 percent of that in the tropical region), as well as around 25 percent of the country’s mangroves and the largest
      distribution area of coral reefs. The province also harbors the greatest diversity of mangrove and coral reef species in
      China, and is the only place with some tropical seagrass species such as Enhalus acoroides. Those coastal habitats
      support rich biodiversity and provide vital ecosystem services such as coastal protection, water purification, and
      carbon sequestration7. Specifically, the abovementioned National Master Plan calls for an integrated approach in
      managing Hainan’s critical ecosystems, emphasizing comprehensive restoration of terrestrial forest ecosystems, the
      establishment of river ecological corridors, and protecting key coastal ecosystems.

9. Hainan’s coastal ecosystems have been under increasing pressure from human activities, such as habitat
   destruction, soil erosion due to land degradation and water pollution. Over the past few decades, the island has
   experienced rapid population growth - from 7.43 million in 2000 to 10.27 million in 2022 - and increased urban and
   tourism development, which has placed considerable stress on the natural environment. Remote sensing data indicate
   that, by 2020, land degradation was most pronounced in the coastal areas and the central mountainous region in the
   south compared to 2000. Meanwhile, water pollution and soil erosion from degraded lands continue to degrade
   coastal ecosystems. Off Hainan, coastal eutrophication has led to an 87 percent decrease in seagrass biomass and a
   reduction in species within one decade. 8 Degradation of natural barriers like coral reefs further increase coastal
   erosion and vulnerability.

10. Within this context, Hainan has prioritized its coastal ecosystem restoration and protection as a foundation for its
    long-term sustainable development. In 2018, Hainan passed its Wetland Protection Regulation, improving the legal
    system for coastal wetland protection. In 2022, Hainan issued the ‘Implementation Plan for Mangrove Protection and
    Restoration (2022-2025),’ aiming to increase 2000 hectares of mangroves and restore 3200 hectares of existing ones
    by the end of 2025 and protection of all existing mangroves in the province. In the same year, Hainan also issued the
    ‘Three-Year Action Plan for Coral Reef Restoration and Protection (2023-2025)’, which is China's first local-level action
    plan specifically targeting the coral reef ecosystems. As a result, from 2018 to 2025, Hainan province restored 150 km
    of natural coastline, over 1200 hectares of mangroves and 27 hectares of coral reefs. In early 2025, Hainan issued its
    Provincial Coastal and Marine Spatial Plan (2021–2035), which further identifies ecosystem restoration and protection
    as a priority area. The plan sets a binding target to maintain the current natural coastline conservation rate of 63
    percent, compared to a national target at 35 percent. In February 2024, Hainan also released its first provincial
    Biodiversity Conservation Strategy and Action Plan, which aims to restore 30 percent of degraded ecosystems by 2030.

11. However, restoration efforts have achieved suboptimal outcomes due to challenges including fragmented approach,
    inadequate pollution management, invasive species and lack of long-term monitoring. Newly restored ecosystems
    in Hainan face new challenges. For example, restored corals and seagrass face challenges of low survival rate due to
    persistent water pollution discharged from upstream riverine systems, as well as sediments due to soil erosion from
    upstream mountainous areas. While the coastal waters in Hainan province largely comply with national quality
    standards, key ecosystem stressors - particularly pollutants like dissolved suspended solids (DSS) and turbidity, which
    are not routinely monitored - continue to threaten vulnerable coastal habitats such as coral reefs and seagrass beds.
    These fine particles reduce light penetration, smother benthic organisms, and impair ecological function, yet their
    impact remains overlooked in current regulatory frameworks. Monospecific restoration for mangroves has introduced


7 Li et al.(2024) Blue carbon development in China: realistic foundation, internal demands, and the construction of blue carbon market trading mode. Frontiers in
Marine Science. 1310261. [link]
8 Leibniz Center for Tropical Marine Research - Fact Sheet. Seagrass in Hainan China. [link]




                                                                                                                                                           Page 4



                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Hainan Coastal Ecosystem Restoration and Protection PforR Program(P512663)


     alien species, mainly L. racemosa introduced in 1999,9 that have become invasive driving out native species, including
     some native mangrove species that are identified as endangered or vulnerable by the International Union for
     Conservation of Nature (IUCN), for instance Lumnitzera littorea in Lingshui County of Hainan Province.

12. Climate change further exacerbates these pressures: rising sea levels and warming temperatures contribute to
    coastal inundation, saltwater intrusion, land salinization, and the degradation of sensitive ecosystems. Under the
    RCP4.5 concentration pathway, the frequency of heavy rainfall will increase in the future, with a growth of around
    0.16 times each decade.10 The Climate and Disaster Risk Screening11 conducted for this proposed Program indicates
    that addressing these climate-exacerbated challenges calls for an integrated approach for ecosystem restoration and
    management. The World Bank’s Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) for China12 calls for leveraging NbS
    through ecosystem restoration to address those climate-exacerbated challenges.

13. Hainan is well-positioned to serve as a model province for implementing an integrated ‘Ridge to River to Reef’ (3R)
    approach for restoring and protecting coastal ecosystems, offering strong potential for replication and scale-up. As
    the smallest province in land area in China, Hainan's interior is dominated by rugged, forested mountains, with the
    highest peak at 1,840 meters. This central highland acts as the island's ‘water tower.’ From the central highlands, over
    100 rivers radiate outwards in all directions. These rivers act as natural conveyor belts, transporting freshwater,
    sediments, nutrients, and – critically - pollutants from the interior, through human-dominated landscapes, and finally
    to the coastal waters. Hainan’s topography is not just a suitable testing ground - it is arguably one of the best in the
    world for the proposed 3R approach for restoring and protecting critical and vulnerable coastal ecosystems. Its radial
    river systems create a direct, undeniable link from the ridge-top forests, through the farmlands and human
    settlements, to the vulnerable coasts, making it a perfect place to prove that managing one ecosystem requires
    managing them all in an integrated manner.

 Relationship to CAS/CPF

14. The proposed Program is fully consistent with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
    China (FY 2020–2025) (Report No. 117875-CN) 13 and the strategic priorities reaffirmed in the recent Performance
    and Learning Review (PLR). The proposed operation strengthens the Bank’s engagement under Area 2: Promoting
    Greener Development and will contribute to achieving both objective 2.4 (strengthening sustainable natural resource
    management), objective 2.2 (reducing air, soil, water and marine plastic pollution) and objective 2.3 (demonstrating
    sustainable agriculture practices). The proposed Program also aligns with the CPF’s selectivity criteria for contributing
    to global public goods, supporting institutional improvement, and implementing innovative and scalable solutions that
    can be replicated. The proposed Program will contribute to global biodiversity conservation and climate change
    mitigation (paragraph 16). In addition, it builds on the recommendations of the China CCDR leveraging NbS to build
    nature-based carbon sink as well as resilience towards climate-exacerbated disaster risks.




9 Cheng et al. (2023) Current Status and Potential Invasiveness Evaluation of an Exotic Mangrove Species, Laguncularia racemosa (L.) C.F. Gaertn, on Hainan Island,

China. Forests. 14(10), 2036. [link]
10 Xie (2023) Analysis on the Impact of Human Economic Activities on Climate Change in Hainan Island. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Financial

Technology and Business Analysis [link]
11 The Program area was assessed using the World Bank Group’s Climate and Disaster Risk Screening Project Level Tool. Results highlighted risks from extreme climate-

induced weather events, including droughts and floods, informing the Program’s activities on nature-based solutions improving both water storage and flood resilience.
12 World Bank Group (2022) China Country Climate and Development Report. CCDR Series. World Bank Group, Washington, D.C. [link]
13 World Bank (2019). Country Partnership Framework for the People’s Republic of China for the Period FY2020-2025. Report No. 117875-CN. [link]




                                                                                                                                                                Page 5



                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Hainan Coastal Ecosystem Restoration and Protection PforR Program(P512663)


15. Paris Alignment: The proposed Program is consistent with China’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) in
    2021, 14 Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 2035, 15 Mid-Century Long-Term Low Greenhouse Gas Emission
    Development Strategy16 and recommendations from the CCDR (paragraph 14). The 2021 China NDC highlights the
    importance of carbon sequestration for climate change mitigation by key ecosystems, including forests and blue
    carbon ecosystems, urging decision-makers at all levels to maximize ecosystems’ mitigation and adaptation potential,
    including coastal ecosystems.17 The National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy highlights the role of NbS such as
    coastal ecosystems as a win-win solution for the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services, and climate. 18

   Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument

16. The proposed Program will generate significant global and regional public goods, thereby justifying public sector
    investment. It will enhance nature-based carbon sequestration by restoring priority ecosystems, including forests,
    mangroves and seagrass beds. The total amount of nature-based carbon sequestration increased due to Program
    activities will be quantified during Program preparation. Hainan is recognized as one of the world's 34 biodiversity
    hotspots and its diverse coastal ecosystems provide critical habitats. Restoring and protecting Hainan’s coastal
    ecosystems – including managing and restoring inland areas - thus will make a vital contribution to the conservation
    of globally significant biodiversity. Reducing riverine and coastal water pollution entering the sea will contribute to
    reducing regional marine pollution and protecting critical marine ecosystems and biodiversity. The proposed Program
    also aligns with key international frameworks, including the Paris Agreement (2015) and the Kunming-Montreal Global
    Biodiversity Framework (2022).

17. The World Bank has been supporting China’s coastal ecological and environment management for almost last three
    decades. Two Shandong Environment Projects in 1997 and 2007 (P040185 and P077752) prevented over 30,000 tons
    of Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) from growing coastal urban population entering the Yellow sea; Sustainable
    Coastal Resource Development Project in 1998 (P003539) financed more than 2,000 hectares of mangrove restoration
    and reduction of pollution from the aquaculture sector; The 2012 GEF Huai River Basin Marine Pollution Reduction
    Project (P108592) promoted artificial wetlands in coastal regions to prevent agriculture non-point source pollutions;
    the ongoing Yellow River Basin Ecological Protection and Environmental Pollution Control Program (Gansu and
    Shandong) (2024) (P178401) is supporting integrated water and environmental management in the Yellow river to
    protect 5200 hectares of salt marshes at the Yellow River delta. Those previous engagements have been focusing on
    the northern Yellow Bohai region. Rich experiences have been accumulated from those operations to support
    integrated coastal ecosystem restoration and protection in Hainan, located in tropical southern region in China.

18. World Bank value added for strengthening institutional capabilities. The World Bank’s support will play a critical role
    in enhancing the institutional capacity for integrated coastal ecosystem management, leveraging nature for both
    climate mitigation and adaptation. The proposed Program will support the province to develop a 3R system for
    integrated coastal ecosystem management, including integrated planning, restoration techniques, monitoring plans
    and financing strategies. A dedicated Results Area is proposed to financed results achieved for institutional
    strengthening. The strengthened institutional capacity and knowledge base will not only support the sustainability of
    restoration outcomes beyond the Program’s duration. The experiences and results generated by the Program have
    strong potential for replication and scaling up within China as well as globally.

14 China’s Achievements, New Goals and New Measures for Nationally Determined Contributions. [link].
15 China’s Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 2035. [link].
16 China’s Mid-Century Long-Term Low Greenhouse Gas Emission Development Strategy. [link].
17 Government of China (2022) China’s Achievements, New Goals and New Measures for Nationally Determined Contributions. [link]
18 Ministry of Ecology and Environment (2022) National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 2035. [link]




                                                                                                                                         Page 6



                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Hainan Coastal Ecosystem Restoration and Protection PforR Program(P512663)


19. The Program will introduce three key innovative and scalable solutions to coastal ecosystem restoration and
    protection in Hainan: (a) promoting an integrated 3R approach. While existing policy documents advocate for such
    an integrated approach, there is a lack of practical frameworks and pathways for implementation. This program aims
    to address the gap by conducting ecosystem services and stressor assessment with spatial prioritization, thereby
    enabling the 3R approach to be adopted at program counties and scaled up through institutional development; (b)
    leveraging NbS to manage agriculture non-point source (NPS) pollution and coastal aquaculture tailwater pollution;
    and (c) leveraging coastal ecosystems for climate mitigation and adaption actions, including developing blue carbons
    sinks and piloting nature-based “living shorelines” 19 (breathing seawalls) design to enhance coastal resilience.

20. The Program for Results (PforR) is proposed as the lending instrument for the proposed operation in consideration
    of the Government capacity and the ability to leverage ongoing financing. The PforR instrument was selected in
    consideration of the Government’s capacity and the ability to leverage financing under the existing Government’s
    programs. The Hainan government has an ambitious strategy for coastal ecosystem restoration and protection at
    different levels, with strong commitments from both provincial and local governments and agencies. The PforR
    instrument can leverage significant resources under the existing Government programs to achieve impacts beyond
    traditional Investment Project Financing (IPF). It provides an opportunity to introduce performance-based incentives
    to improve the efficiency, effectiveness, and impact of expenditures by linking the disbursement of funds to the
    achievement of specific results.

 C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

     Program Development Objective(s)

 21. The Proposed Program Development Objectives (PDO) is to restore priority coastal ecosystems and reduce their
     degradation threats in selected regions of Hainan Province.

 PDO Level Results Indicators

22. Achievement of the PDO will be measured with the following outcome indicators:
    a) Terrestrial and aquatic areas under enhanced conservation/management (ha) (Corporate Scorecard Indicator)
    b) Natural coastline with enhanced climate resilience (km)
    c) Reduction in Pollutant loads (Total Phosphorus [TP]) entering rivers and sea (tons/year)
    d) Reduction of soil erosion into the rivers and sea (tons/year)
    e) Improved institutional capacity adopting 3R approach for coastal ecosystem management in Hainan (Text)


 D. Program Description

 PforR Program Boundary

23. Government program. The Hainan Provincial Coastal and Marine Spatial Management Plan (2021-2035) was issued
    by Hainan Provincial Department of Natural Resources and Planning in April 2025, with objectives to promote
    ecological protection and sustainable development in Hainan’s coastal region. The Plan outlines seven areas of action:

19
  A living shoreline is a nature-based method for stabilizing a shoreline, preventing erosion, improving coastal resilience and providing other benefits. Unlike traditional
“hard” techniques, such as concrete seawalls, living shorelines are made of natural materials such as vegetation, sand, rock, or oyster shells.


                                                                                                                                                                      Page 7



                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Hainan Coastal Ecosystem Restoration and Protection PforR Program(P512663)


    (1) coastal natural resources management; (2) coastal ecological restoration and protection; (3) coastal industrial
    layout optimization; (4) coastal living environment improvement; (5) coastal disaster prevention and reduction; (6)
    coastal spatial planning and guidance; and (7) ecosystem-based integrated coastal zone management. Among these,
    the second area of action specifies three main actions: (a) to adopt an integrated approach from ridge to river to reef;
    (b) to restore and protect critical coastal ecosystems; and (c) to promote land-sea coordinated pollution control. In
    addition, the fifth area also emphasizes leveraging natural ecosystems for coastal disaster prevention and reduction.

24. PfoR Program Boundary: The Program will finance results achieved under RA1 and RA2 within two selected Program
    counties, i.e. Lingshui and Changjiang counties. These two counties are provincially administered and represent two
    out of the 25 in total in Hainan, of which 17 are along the coast. The two counties are selected based on three criteria:
    (a) representativeness of coastal ecosystem challenges; (b) willingness to borrow; and (c) fiscal capacity to borrow.
    The selection of Lingshui and Changjiang counties provides a representative cross-section of Hainan's coastal
    challenges and opportunities. Lingshui, on the developed east coast, exemplifies tourism-driven pressures on coastal
    ecosystems. In contrast, Changjiang, on the west coast, faces agriculture and aquaculture-related threats to its water
    quality and coastal ecosystems. Together, they form ideal 'ridge-to-river-to-reef' demonstration areas. This allows the
    project to pioneer integrated management models - from upstream farmland non-point source pollution reduction to
    coastal ecosystem restoration - creating a comprehensive toolkit of innovative, scalable solutions for coastal resilience
    that can be replicated across Hainan and beyond. The proposed PforR Program boundary is therefore the two Program
    counties and institutional activities at the provincial level to be implemented by the Provincial Department of Natural
    Resources and Planning. The Program area accounts for approximately 10 percent of Hainan’s total coastal land area
    as well as coastline.


 E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening

25. Preliminary Environmental and Social Risk Screening and E&S Risk Rating. Implementation of the proposed activities
    would have significant and broadly positive environmental and social (E&S) effects in the Program areas and are
    expected to generate long-term environmental and social benefits, but may also result in localized, site-specific
    impacts during construction and operation, such as potential disturbance of habitats and risks associated with
    wastewater management and farmland rehabilitation. These activities will be carried out on existing state-owned
    land/sea areas or collectively owned land, without changes in land ownership or involving significant land acquisition
    or resettlement. An initial E&S screening was conducted at the concept stage to define the proposed Program
    boundaries and activities and recommend refinements to the Program activities through excluding those likely to have
    significant adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented on the environment and/or affected people.
    A more detailed description of Program activities is subject to an update by the provinces. A detailed E&S screening
    table will be prepared during Program preparation, after the Program activities are confirmed.

26. E&S Exclusion Lists. In line with Bank policy and based on the review of the technical design at the concept stage, the
    Program will exclude all types of activities listed in Paragraphs 14 and 16 of Bank Guidance on PforR ESSA (issued in
    December 2024). Based on the information available at the concept stage and experience with implementation of
    similar programs in the country and project areas, the following activities are among those recommended to be
    excluded: permanent-basic-farmland acquisition; large-scale farmland acquisition; adverse impacts on ethnic
    minority; livelihood impact arising from the restriction of access or transfer of land/sea rights; large scale household
    relocation; the closure of enterprises; large-scale wastewater treatment plant (treatment capacity>100,000 m3/day),

                                                                                                                         Page 8



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Hainan Coastal Ecosystem Restoration and Protection PforR Program(P512663)


    and mining area rehabilitation. A preliminary E&S exclusion list has been shared with the Program agencies during
    technical visits in Hainan from August 17 to 22, 2025. The detailed E&S exclusion criteria will be finalized during the
    ESSA preparation and will apply to all Program activities, including linked/associated activities. With the application of
    the exclusion criteria to be developed, the Program activities are not anticipated to involve any high E&S risks, but
    largely at the risk level of Moderate to Substantial from environmental and social perspectives.

27. OP 7.50 International Waterways. OP 7.50 is not currently expected to be triggered. OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed
    Areas is not applicable to the Program.

28. An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) will be conducted, consulted upon, and disclosed prior to
    Program Appraisal. The ESSA will entail a review of the domestic E&S legislation framework and the implementing
    capacities and performance of the respective government agencies that will participate in E&S management under
    the Program (given their track record) and evaluate their consistency with the core principles and key planning
    elements specified in PforR Policy, Directive and Guidance on PforR ESSA. The ESSA will closely examine the activities
    with potential concerns on E&S risks and impacts, to determine whether the risks can be avoided or reduced to an
    acceptable level through technical or capacity-strengthening measures, which will be included in the PAP and/or
    considered for potential DLIs.

29. Stakeholder Engagement. The Program will involve various stakeholders such as government departments, e.g., the
    natural resources departments, water resource departments, ecology and environment departments, and agriculture
    departments, affected parties/people such as those affected by land use, water use rights, and other agencies who
    may be interested or in a position to influence the implementation of the Program. During the ESSA, the task team
    will engage meaningfully with both internal and external stakeholders to inform ESSA preparation and solicit inputs
    to strengthen E&S risk management throughout the operation. The draft ESSA will be disclosed to the public and
    consulted with key stakeholders prior to appraisal.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Xiawei Liao
   Environmental Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  The People's Republic of China

 Implementing Agencies
  Hainan Provincial Department of Natural Resources and Planning



                                                                                                                          Page 9



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Hainan Coastal Ecosystem Restoration and Protection PforR Program(P512663)


FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                                                        Page 10



                                                                                 Official Use Only
