Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 06/30/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05037




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jul 09, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P512407                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       SFDP                        2026

                     Operation Name            Sustainable Fisheries Development Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Viet Nam                  Viet Nam                                 EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC       Environment, Natural
                                                                                                                    Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                    Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance       Ministry of Agriculture and              25-Aug-2025                 26-Feb-2026
                     (MOF)                     Environment (MAE)

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     26-Jun-2025               181,930,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Enhance the management of fisheries sector and increase value-added through upgrading with 'smart infrastructure'


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Blue Economy has become an important engine of economic growth for Viet Nam, with the 28 coastal provinces
                     accounting for close to 60 percent of the national GDP. Protecting marine resources is a core priority in the 2018
                     Strategy for Sustainable Development of Viet Nam’s Marine Economy by 2030 and the vision for 2045 (Marine Strategy).
                     The Marine Strategy further prioritizes ensuring prosperity, safety, and resilience for coastal communities, where a large
                     portion of the population resides. Improved fisheries governance, recovery of fish stock, and higher fish food quality are
                     key priorities. To achieve goals of protecting resources and safeguarding livelihoods of small-scale fishers, the adoption
                     of related fisheries legislation emphasizes co-management in nearshore fisheries. Broader sector development

                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     directions include increasing aquaculture, decreasing capture, improving value-addition through investments in smart
                     infrastructure, and ensuring sustainability, including though the development of modern “Blue Ports”, and continued
                     fishing fleet rationalization. While resources and habitats are under co-management and showing improvement,
                     development disturbances and climate change are expected to impact capture fisheries substantially in the coming
                     decade. The proposed Sustainable Fisheries Development work (SFDP) will support the Government of Viet Nam in
                     advancing the implementation of key aspects of the country's Fisheries Law and the Marine Strategy. More specifically,
                     by drawing on core fisheries sustainability pillars, the SFDP will support the newly-formed Ministry of Agriculture and
                     Environment (MAE) and selected provinces in strengthening fisheries governance systems and undertaking strategic
                     investments, particularly in climate-resilient smart infrastructure for protecting and improving production capacities and
                     supply chains, as well as for scaling-up adaptation in low-laying coastal areas through support for poli-culture adoption.
                     The SFDP is further informed by the strategic development directions in the fisheries sector outlined in Viet Nam’s
                     Socio-Economic Development Strategy (SEDS) 2021-2030 and Plan (SEDP) 2021-2025, whereby marine aquaculture and
                     capture fisheries are recognized as priority sectors in the country’s economic development, providing significant
                     contribution to the economy. To this end, the SFDP will focus on assisting Viet Nam to meet priority needs in setting up
                     functioning fisheries information management systems (FIMS) and developing modern “Blue Ports” to strengthen
                     climate resilience, improve value addition and strengthen port state control to meet market access and traceability
                     requirements for sustainable fisheries management. Targeted infrastructure support to key fishing ports and vessel
                     shelters under both central and provincial management is needed, given their importance in fisheries governance
                     particularly for port state control of capture fisheries. Aquaculture support will further focus on strengthening coastal
                     adaptation in conjunction with introducing poli-culture practices to expand sustainable production of Viet Nam’s key
                     export shrimp commodity. Enabling emerging high-value mariculture commodities, such as crustaceans and mollusks




Public Disclosure
                     will also be considered. The SFDP investments directed at protecting marine fishery resources are expected to
                     contribute, in the long run, to mitigating biodiversity loss and diminishing ecosystem services while supporting
                     livelihoods, food, and nutrition security, all of which are inherently linked and contribute to the foundations of a livable
                     Planet Earth. Thus, the SFDP will help Viet Nam to grow its marine economy without depleting its natural capital and
                     while benefiting multiple fishery communities. The investments in seven (07) subprojects under MAE component
                     involving the construction/upgrading of grade I[1] and regional fishing ports and storm shelters include. These include:
                     (a) wharves for vessels and logistic services, with lengths varying from 122 to 250 meters; port sections embankments of
                     hundreds of meters long; dredging of access channels and anchoring waters with areas ranging from a few to tens of
                     hectares; and dredged material volumes from a few thousand to tens of thousands of cubic meters. Except for the one
                     subproject on upgrading Tam Quan storm shelter, the excavated materials is about 500,000 m3; (b) technical
                     infrastructure, such as internal roads; electricity, water supply, drainage and wastewater treatment systems; signaling
                     and communication systems, etc.; and (c) logistic infrastructures including warehouses for fishery classification, storage,
                     and processing; operational houses, etc. The Kien Giang and Soc Trang provincial subprojects encompass investments in
                     upgrading aquaculture infrastructure. Specifically, for Kien Giang: 23 sluices with widths ranging from 8-10 meters to
                     serve rice and aquaculture farming; upgrading of transport roads to nine meters wide with a total length of 7 km;
                     construction of low voltage and medium power lines, and 30 small transformer stations to operate the sluices. The
                     subproject also introduces and scales up innovative aquaculture practices in rice-shrimp and mangrove-shrimp/crab
                     farming for resilient livelihoods. It includes training, linking the private sector for aquaculture products, marketing,
                     support for origin tracking, and certification to meet VietGAP, SRP, and ASC standards, as well as GHG emission
                     reduction measurement. For Soc Trang, these physical investments include upgrading rural roads and bridges with a
                     total length of about 73.7 km and widths of 7.5 meters; dredging canals to provide better water supply and discharge,
                     and to backfill the project rural roads along these canals. The total length of dredged canals is about 305 km, with


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     excavated materials amounting to 2.9 million cubic meters. It is noted that although the total volume of Soc Trang
                     investments is large, they are small-scale investments scattered across a large rural area of four districts in Soc Trang
                     province. The dredged canals are intra-field, and analysis showed that the dredged materials are non-contaminated.
                     The Soc Trang subproject also includes support to introduce and scale up innovative aquaculture practices for resilient
                     livelihoods, and support to ethnic minority communes for the construction of family latrines to improve sanitation and
                     the environment in aquaculture areas.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project will be implemented across seven coastal provinces in various ecological regions of Vietnam, spanning from
                     the North to the South. The proposed investments will be situated in existing or planned areas for provincial fishing
                     ports, storm shelters, and shrimp culture zones. Most of the subproject investments (eight out of nine subprojects) will
                     primarily occur on the mainland in modified habitats or areas already impacted by human activities, such as ports with
                     associated industrial infrastructure. The exception pertains to the investment in upgrading fishing port and storm
                     shelter, located on Bach Long Vy island, which is within the development area of the Bach Long Vy protected marine
                     area (MPA). The project sites are accessible via roads and/or waterways. The existing systems at the fishing ports are
                     generally poorly managed, including improper management of solid waste and the discharge of untreated wastewater
                     into the environment. The project areas are all vulnerable to climate change and natural disasters, albeit at varying
                     levels.

                     Regarding social characteristics, as of 2023 (GSO data), the seven provinces within the project area had a population of



Public Disclosure
                     13.44 million, mainly in plains and coastal areas, with a density of 382 pers./square km. Major ethnic groups include the
                     Kinh majority, Khmer (in Soc Trang, Kien Giang), and Muong, Thai, H’Mong (in Thanh Hoa), along with urban Sino-
                     Vietnamese ethnic Hoa (in Soc Trang, Kien Giang). These Ethnic Minorities (EM), particularly the Khmer, live intermixed
                     with the Kinh. Their livelihoods, mostly reliant on agriculture, are increasingly vulnerable to climate change. The Khmer
                     also engage in fishery and aquaculture. The Khmer are self-identified as an EM group among 54 ethnic group and
                     nationaly recognized. They have distinct customary cultural, economic, and social institutions separate from the
                     majority Kinh people, and they speak the Khmer language, which differs from the national language (Tiếng Việt).

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented by a central Agricultural Project Management Board (APMB) under Ministry of
                     Agriculture and Environment (MAE), and provincial ODA Project Management Units (PPMUs). Provinces for which
                     investments are included in the MAE’s managed component include Hai Phong, Thai Binh, Thanh Hoa, Binh Dinh, Kien
                     Giang, and Khanh Hoa.

                     The APMB/PPMUs have experience in implementing World Bank funded projects, and their relevant departments are
                     familiar with World Bank safeguards requirements. However, none of these agencies have experience in preparing and
                     implementing a project under the ESF, meaning that training and capacity building will be required. They will need to
                     familiarize with the concept of proportionality and adaptive management of the ESF, and will need understand the new
                     requirements, e.g. on labor and working conditions, community health and safety, occupational health and safety
                     (OHS), modified natural habitats and the requirements for systematic stakeholder engagement. Furthermore, the
                     responsibility for LAR implementation and/or GRM resolution lies principally with district government agencies, where it
                     found a lack the capable staff to complete the land-related requirements in a timely fashion. The Bank team also

                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     expects a significant increase in Borrower’s demand for continuous hands-on support in E&S risk management during
                     preparation and implementation, as compared to the previous safeguard policies, and anticipates that this will require
                     additional resources and staff time.

                     Proposed mitigation measures include the World Bank team providing ESF implementation training and comprehensive
                     capacity assessments during project preparation and implementation. Capacity building activities shall include the
                     recruitment of additional qualified staff, hands-on extended implementation support (HEIS), mobilization of supervision
                     and monitoring consultants.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     The environmental risk is Substantial. The investments under MAE component involving the construction/upgrading
                     of fishing ports and storm shelters include: (a) wharves for vessels and logistic services; port embankments; dredging
                     of access channels and anchoring waters; (b) technical infrastructure, such as roads; electricity, water supply,
                     drainage and wastewater treatment systems; signaling and communication systems, etc.; (c) logistic infrastructures
                     i.e. warehouses for fishery classification, storage, and processing; operational houses, etc. The investments under the
                     Kien Giang and Soc Trang components include canal dredging, construction and upgrading of sluices for saline and
                     freshwater separation, rural roads and bridges, electricity system, and storm shelters. The main environmental risks



Public Disclosure
                     and impacts during and construction include: (i) safety risks related to UXO; (ii) pollution impacts from dust, waste,
                     and wastewater generation; (iii) temporary increase in water turbidity and impacts to aquatic life during dredging
                     process; (iv) water and soil pollution risks due to improper management and disposal of dredged material, and
                     construction waste; (v) erosion and subsidence risks during embankment and wharf construction; (v) waterway traffic
                     disruption and traffic disturbances from material transportation; (vi) health and safety risks to the community and
                     workers. These impacts are short-term, moderate to substantial, and reversible. During operation, key environmental
                     risks and impacts include: (i) oil leakage, soil and water pollution risk and impacts from port operation; (ii) impacts to
                     aquatic life due to maintenance dredging at ports; (iii) occupational and community health and safety risks during
                     port operation; (iv) and health risks from overuse of chemicals in shrimp farming; (v) land salinization and water
                     pollution from saline shrimp farms. These impacts are long-term, reversible, mitigatable. The risk will be reassessed
                     during project preparation.
                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk is classified Substantial considering project activities, scale and location and the Borrower’s
                     implementation capacity. The upgrading of the infrastructure will require land acquisition, and physical relocation, as
                     well as access restrictions to livelihood opportunities. Approximately 215ha of various types of land from about 700
                     households will be acquired. 80 households may need to be relocated, under the MAE (68) and Kien Giang (12)
                     components. Acquisition of paddy land (approx. 2.1ha) will adversely impact rice farmers who rely on rice cultivation
                     for their main source of livelihood. There will also be land acquisition of residential, garden, aquaculture, and public
                     lands. Land acquisition for development of the resettlement site will also affect paddy production. Those impacts,
                     along with loss of land, will be adversely affected to Khmer ethnic group present in the project area, whose


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     livelihoods tend to be more precarious and sensitive to disruption. There is also a risk of temporary restrictions on
                     access to aquaculture and fishing activities, and residential establishments, which could temporarily affect people’s
                     livelihoods and living situations. Restriction of access to fisheries could also result from measures to improve fisheries
                     management capacity for combatting illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing. The government and
                     implementing agencies have capacity limitations regarding the LAR process, budgeting and LAR complaint resolution
                     as observed from current project implementation practices. Such potential impacts/risks require appropriate
                     mitigation plans and discussions from the beginning of the project to develop and effectively implement at a later
                     stage of project preparation and implementation. The social risk classification will be revisited at Appraisal once the
                     team has a clear picture of the risks and impacts.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      Three sets of draft E&S documents are being developed for three project components under the SFDP: the MAE
                      project and the two provincial projects in Soc Trang and Kien Giang: an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                      (ESIA) and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP); a Resettlement Plan (RP); Labor Management
                      Procedures (LMP); Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEP); and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP),
                      and Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP). The documents are in line with the Bank’s ESF and national
                      regulations. A grievance redress mechanism will be developed to provide guidance on the reception, recording,



Public Disclosure
                      handling, and reporting of complaints that may arise during project implementation, in accordance with World Bank
                      standards and the complaints law. The documents are currently being reviewed by the Bank task team and relevant
                      Government of Vietnam (GoV) agencies. They will be revised in the coming period and finalized prior to negotiation.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      Key project stakeholders identified during initial assessment include project-affected people and interested parties at
                      various central/provincial/district and community levels. Consultants and contractors are accounted as key
                      stakeholders. Stakeholder engagement planning process should ensure transparency and meaningful consultations
                      with the affected and interested parties throughout the project cycle. Implementing agencies will prepare a
                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) proportionate to the nature and scale of the project activities and potential risks
                      and impacts. The SEPs include a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that will be maintained in parallel with existing
                      national grievance redress mechanism. The Borrower will disclose the project E&S instruments (ESIAs, ESCPs, RPs,
                      SEPs, EMDPs, LMPs, and GRM) prior to project appraisal to inform stakeholders about the proposed project activities,
                      the potential environmental and social risks and impacts, and proposed mitigation measures.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The Borrower will develop a LMP for management of direct workers (PPMU staff and consultants), contracted
                      workers (about 200-250 skilled and nonskilled workers), and primary supply workers (for essential construction
                      materials as defined in ESS2). Community workers are not expected. Viet Nam has a comprehensive labor and
                      working conditions framework, including the Labor Law (2019), the Law on Occupational Health and Sanitation


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                      (2015), the Social Security Law (2014), and the Civil Servant Law (2019). Viet Nam ratified the Right to Organize and
                      Collective Bargaining Convention, effective July 2020. These laws align with ESS2 principles on fair treatment, non-
                      discrimination, equal opportunities, workers' rights, prohibition of sexual exploitation, forced labor, child labor, and
                      Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks. As a government entity, the PPMUs follow these laws, with trade unions
                      and grievance mechanisms in place, minimizing ESS2 risks for direct project workers

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      Risks and impacts relevant to ESS3 requirements have been identified, including pollutant release, waste
                      management, and resource use efficiency. The project is expected to consume substantial raw materials for
                      construction, necessitating careful consideration to ensure resource efficiency. Significant land degradation could
                      occur if raw material extraction is not properly managed. The project's dredging and construction activities could
                      result in air emission, wastewater, and runoff; potentially causing air and water pollution. Dredged material with high
                      levels of organic substances, and construction waste could contaminate land and water if not properly disposed of
                      and managed. The removal of few flood protection plants may cause coastal soil erosion. Mitigation measures to
                      manage the risks and impacts including, a Dredging &Dredged Materials Management Plan (DDMP), suitable and
                      legal areas for material disposal will be developed and included in the subproject’s ESMPs, and ESMPs.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      Community health and safety risks and impacts are likely from construction noise, vibration, air pollution,
                      inappropriate management of construction waste and dredging materials, movement of heavy vehicles and plant in




Public Disclosure
                      congested and other restricted areas, worker influx into small communities. In addition, there is also risk related to
                      UXO left from the war which ended in 1975. An initial screening for GBV, SEA/SH risks indicates a low risk due to the
                      small number of locally recruited workers at each site. The Borrower will implement the E&S management plans and
                      measures including UXO screening, construction site management, traffic management, waste management. To
                      manage social impacts, activities include mapping service providers, assessing SEA/SH risks, and establishing
                      procedures for risk assessment and mitigation. Mitigation measures related to project workers are incorporated
                      within the labor management procedures. GBV, SEA/SH risks will be monitored throughout the project.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      Approximately 215 ha of land from 680 HHs will need to be permanently acquired. Out of these, 80 HHs will require
                      relocation to serviced resettlement sites under the MAE and Kien Giang components. The acquisition of 2.1 ha of
                      paddy land will have a marginal impact on double-crop rice farmers. Other affected lands include residential, garden,
                      aquaculture, and public lands. A resettlement site to be developed in Kien Giang under the MEA component will
                      affect 4.5 ha of paddy field (12 HHs). Temporary restrictions on access to aquaculture, fishing activities, and
                      residential areas could disrupt livelihoods and living conditions. Measures to improve fisheries management may also
                      restrict access. Proportionate measures to mitigate the LAR impacts are carefully developed during resettlement
                      planning. The RP is prepared to ensure that the mitigation measures are adequate to restore living conditions for
                      those affected and includes functioning GRM for redress of resettlement-related grievances.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources



                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                      Project activities on existing canals and rivers may impact aquatic life, but are situated in areas designated for fishing
                      ports and shrimp culture, not within critical habitats or high biodiversity areas. An exception is a MAE subproject
                      involving upgrading the fishing port and storm shelter in Bach Long Vy island. The subproject investments and the 03
                      disposal sites locate within the development area of the Bach Long Vy MPA. These activities are distant from the MPA
                      strictly protected zones and, so impacts on the critical habitats of the MPA is not expected. However, two of the three
                      disposal sites are adjacent (50-100m) to the MPA restoration area. The dredging and disposal of excavated material
                      could impact the biodiversity and aquatic ecosystem, including the coral reef in the MPA's foreshore in the
                      restoration area if it is not carefully managed. The ESIAs will assess biodiversity in the project areas, and the ESMPs
                      will include effective proportionate measures.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                              Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      About 190 Khmer HHs in Soc Trang and Kien Giang will be directly affected by loss of lands. While the project aims to
                      bring positive changes on livelihoods to local communities, including EMs, by improving access to sustainable
                      aquaculture technologies and enhancing coastal resource management, it may also negatively impact these
                      communities, including land taking, access restriction, and changes in livelihood models. The Khmer EM present in
                      the project areas meets three criteria (a), (c) and (d) as outlined in the ESS7, hence the ESS7 is relevant. To address
                      these concerns, an EMDP was prepared using Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) process. This ensures that
                      these communities are adequately informed about the project and its potential impacts and have the opportunity to
                      freely give or withhold their consent. The FPIC involves engaging with EMs to discuss the project, providing
                      comprehensive information, and seeking collective support through culturally appropriate means.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      The project will not affect tangible or intangible cultural heritage. Tangible cultural sites are at a distance from the
                      proposed sites and should not be adversely affected by land acquisition or construction impacts (e.g. vibrations,
                      waste disposal or congestion). The ESIAs will conduct further screening to identify tangible and intangible cultural
                      heritage and provide any mitigation measures. The ESMPs will include a chance find procedure to manage any events
                      where tangible cultural heritage is discovered.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      The standard is not relevant, as the project does not involve any financial intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                               No



                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 8 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                       Viet Nam has been advancing its E&S Framework, there are however gaps between the environmental and social
                       assessment regulation and practice, especially in description of the environment, level of impact analysis and
                       mitigation measures, and public consultation and disclosure of information. There is no experience of implementing
                       agencies in implementing and applying ESF and associated environmental and social standards. The project therefore
                       will apply to the World Bank ESF and does not use the Borrower’s E&S Framework.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             No
                       No

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The Borrower shall publicly disclose the draft ESIAs, ESCPs, SEPs, RPs, EMDPs, and LMPs in a form and language
                     appropriate to stakeholders to meaningfully reflect feedback into project design and for appropriate adaptive
                     mitigation measures.

                     Prior to Bank Board Approval, the Borrower is expected to complete:
                     (1)      Final Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) including Environmental and Social Management Plan
                     (ESMP)
                     (2)      Final Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)



Public Disclosure
                     (3)      Final Resettlement Plan (RP)
                     (4)      Final Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     (5)      Final Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP), and
                     (6)      Final Labor Management Procedures (LMP)

                     Areas to be addressed in the ESCPs:
                     (1)     Commitment to prepare and implement the E&S instruments as per the requirements of relevant
                     Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs), i.e., ESIA, ESCP, SEP, RP, EMDP, and LMP
                     (2)     Adequate allocation of resources for implementation of the ESF, ESSs and E&S instruments
                     (3)     Commitment to prepare and implement a capacity building plan with strong focus on implementation of ESF,
                     ESSs and E&S instruments
                     (4)     Update Resettlement Plans, based on DMS and RCS results, and establish and maintain grievance redress
                     mechanism
                     (5)     Establish a Project Level Grievance Redress Mechanism

                     The timeframe for these instruments during implementation will be specified in the ESCP, and are expected to be prior
                     to the project effectiveness. The timeframe for RPs will have to ensure that RPs' actions are implemented prior to the
                     commencement of physical works. A robust monitoring system will be required to set up and included in the project
                     ESMP.




                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                  Page 9 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Milen F. Dyoulgerov Vollen             Title:       Senior Environmental Specialist

                      Email:                  mdyoulgerov@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Thu Thi Le Nguyen                      Job Title:   Senior Environmental Specialist

                      Email:                  nlethu@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Phuong Hoang Ai Nguyen                 Job Title:   Senior Environmental Specialist

                      Email:                  pnguyen5@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000




Public Disclosure
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                  Milen F. Dyoulgerov Vollen, Thu Thi Le Nguyen, Phuong Hoang Ai Nguyen

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:         Thuy Cam Duong

                     ADM Social Specialist:                Thong Trung Le




                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                Page 10 of 10
