Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Regional Acceleration Project 1 Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Economies Multi-phase
                                       Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Appraisal Stage
Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)

  Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 01/31/2026 | Report No: ESRSA04744




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 09, 2026                                                                                                   Page 1 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project 1 Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Economies Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P512975                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        RISE-RAP                     2026

                     Operation Name            Regional Acceleration Project 1 under the Africa Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Economies
                                               Multi-Phase Approach (RISE-RAP)

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Eastern and Southern      Angola, Burundi, Congo, Democratic        EASTERN AND                  Water
                     Africa                    Republic of, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Kenya,   SOUTHERN AFRICA
                                               Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi,
                                               Mozambique, Namibia, Rwanda,
                                               Somalia, Federal Republic of, South
                                               Africa, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania,
                                               Uganda, Zambia

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date



Public Disclosure
                     AUDA-NEPAD                AUDA-NEPAD                                17-Feb-2026                  31-Mar-2026


                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     30-Jan-2026               10,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the planning and delivery of irrigation policies, investments, and
                     services in Eastern and Southern African countries.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities


                    Feb 09, 2026                                                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project 1 Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Economies Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                     RISE-RAP supports Eastern and Southern African countries in planning and delivery through informing programs and
                     supporting regional alignment. Countries leverage RAP-curated regional knowledge systems, coordination platforms,
                     and TA to inform irrigation policies, investments and services. Rather than develop approaches in isolation, countries
                     can develop shared regional resources including analytics, tools, and lessons learned and adapt them to their specific
                     contexts, fostering efficiency and consistency while preserving country ownership of decisions. In support of achieving
                     the overall Africa RISE MPA PrDO, the Project will support countries across Africa RISE components through facilitating
                     country-facing acceleration activities on learning and knowledge, regional alignment and cooperation, and
                     implementation and innovation. It supports innovation in support to Farmer-Led Irrigation Development, Performance
                     in public service delivery and water security, and addresses the constraints of fragmented, single-project interventions
                     by enabling alignment, shared delivery models, capacity enhancement and stronger partnerships across countries.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project development objective (PDO) for RISE-RAP is to strengthen the capacity to accelerate the implementation
                     and performance of irrigation-related policies and investments in Africa RISE countries. The project is structured in five
                     complementary components: (1) Accelerating Farmer-Led Irrigation Development (FLID). This component will finance
                     technical assistance TA, workshops, training, goods, and operating costs to establish the regional foundations needed to
                     facilitate FLID decision-making at the country level, streamline and strengthen market incentives signals, and tailor
                     cross-cutting lessons that can be readily applied to country programs ; (2) Driving the Performance and Expansion of
                     Public and Community Irrigation Schemes. This component aims to support the transformation of new and existing
                     public and community irrigation schemes into accountable, financially sustainable, performance-driven and service-



Public Disclosure
                     oriented entities. The project will support delivery of these activities at national level by driving regional learning on a
                     performance-based service-delivery management, operations and maintenance (MOM) approach and disseminating
                     learning tools and scaling strategies for use in participating countries. this will include policy, regulatory, and
                     institutional reforms to strengthen mandates, inter-governmental and private-sector coordination, and accountability
                     mechanisms across ministries, irrigation agencies, and local governments as well as piloting of innovative public–private
                     partnership (PPP) and private service provider models for MOM; (3) Ensuring Water Security and Resilience for
                     Irrigation. This component will establish the regional institutional, analytical, and digital ecosystem required to
                     strengthen water security, improve irrigation performance, and build long-term climate resilience across participating
                     countries; (4) Strengthening Value Chain Linkages. This component will support the development and strengthening of
                     agricultural value chains by facilitating knowledge exchange, regional dialogue, and the dissemination of best practices
                     among participating countries; and (5) Sector Governance, Coordination, and Capacity for Irrigation Transformation.
                     This component aims to create the enabling environment and institutional architecture necessary for the successful
                     scaling and sustainability of irrigation transformation across Eastern and Southern Africa. The project will finance a suite
                     of activities that strengthen regional coordination, sector governance, and capacity building, ensuring that the
                     program’s objectives are achieved through collaborative action, policy alignment, and adaptive management.

                     The project operates in the rural contexts and is designed to be inclusive of fragile, conflict-affected, and vulnerable
                     (FCV) settings. Its regional approach means it will engage a diverse array of stakeholders, including national and regional
                     government agencies, universities and research institutions, the private sector, NGOs, and farming communities,
                     potentially including Indigenous Peoples and other marginalized groups. The regional project will not involve associated
                     facilities. However, downstream implementation of TA outputs under Component 2, which aims at enhancing

                    Feb 09, 2026                                                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project 1 Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Economies Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                     performance of existing and new irrigation schemes, may involve associated facilities. The project’s design leverages
                     existing country-led platforms and regional bodies (notably AUDA-NEPAD, AU-SAFGRAD and IWMI (CGIAR) ), ensuring
                     that interventions are contextually relevant and aligned with national priorities. While the program will be implemented
                     in the entire region with diverse environmental and social settings, it will not have direct physical footprint, given focus
                     on institutional capacities and fostering collaboration across the participating countries. However, the frameworks,
                     standards, and tools developed under the project will shape future investments, which could have significant
                     downstream impacts. These may include potential effects on ground and surface water bodies used by farmers,
                     biodiversity, land use, and local livelihoods, especially in ecologically sensitive or high-biodiversity areas.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The program will be implementation through the African Union Framework for Irrigation Development and Agricultural
                     Water Management to leverage strategic institutional partnerships with NEPAD, CGIAR-International Water
                     Management Institute, and regional academic institutions. Africa Union Development Agency (AUDA)-NEPAD will be
                     responsible for overall program management, strategic coordination, and delivery of technical assistance, working in
                     close partnership with AUDA-SAFGRAD, regional academia, and relevant Regional Economic Communities (RECs). A
                     dedicated regional program management unit within AUDA-NEPAD will oversee day-to-day operations, fiduciary
                     management, and compliance with environmental and social safeguards.
                     The International Water Management Institute (IWMI) of CGIAR will provide a contracted service as the principal
                     knowledge partner for RISE-RAP, providing technical leadership, research, and analytical support to AUDA-NEPAD and
                     participating countries, working with regional development institutes, technical training centers, and universities, to




Public Disclosure
                     provide technical assistance, tools, and capacity-building to support robust implementation at both national and
                     regional levels. Regional and global academic networks and research centers, to be defined at later stage, will be the
                     learning and capacity partner to drive applied research, training, and adaptive management and support ongoing
                     learning, and helps monitor progress for continuous improvement. AUDA-NEPAD has experience with Bank funded
                     projects. In the last 7 years, the World Bank and AUDA-NEPAD, through the AU-Semi-Arid Food Grains Research and
                     Development Agency (AU-SAFGRAD) as a specialized technical office of the AU have partnered on high level policy
                     advocacy through regional development dialogue, benchmarking and training. AUDA-NEPAD implemented Southern
                     Africa Tuberculosis and Health Systems Support Project (P155658) under safeguards which closed in June 2024 with
                     moderately satisfactory performance. AU also has experience with ESF under the ongoing FSRP-P177816, with current
                     satisfactory performance. Similarly, IWMI has experience in operating in accordance with the ESF, as well as national
                     laws and regulations of countries of implementation e.g. under AICCRA-P173398, which has been active since 2021 with
                     consistent highly satisfactory ES performance in the last one year.

                     Both the implementing agency, AUDA-NEPAD, and the main technical services provider to be contracted, IWMI, have
                     experience with past and ongoing World Bank funded projects, with overall performance ranging from moderately
                     satisfactory to highly satisfactory. The regional project management unit in AUDA-NEPAD will oversee the project’s day-
                     to-day implementation, including management of environmental and social risks and impacts. The unit already has an
                     environmental management expert as the ESF focal point and will be strengthened with additional environmental and
                     social expertise during project implementation by maintaining, at a minimum, one Environmental and Social
                     Development Specialist, who will be the E&S focal point, one stakeholder engagement/communication specialist and,
                     as needed, hire additional E&S expertise as agreed with the Bank. Knowledge of the ESF and risk management capacity


                    Feb 09, 2026                                                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project 1 Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Economies Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                     will be strengthened through E&S capacity building opportunities planned during the preparation and implementation
                     with ongoing support from the Bank task team. The implementation of E&S measures will be regularly monitored and
                     reported by AUDA-NEPAD. In addition, AUDA-NEPAD will provide regular (quarterly) monitoring reports on the E&S
                     performance of the project.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Moderate
                     The nature of activities to be financed under Africa RISE-RAP revolve around regional policy dialogues and technical
                     assistance activities across all the project components by financing TA, workshops, training, goods, and operating
                     costs. No civil work is envisaged under this project, but later under individual participating country programs which
                     will be assessed separately. The policy dialogues and TA activities are unlikely to create significant direct or indirect
                     environmental risks or impacts to the biophysical environment or the institutional stakeholders or other potentially
                     affected parties at the regional and local levels. Thus, only low to moderate negative impacts and risks are foreseen,
                     primarily associated with (i) the generation of electronic waste from acquiring and operating data center hardware
                     for the MIS; (ii) marginal increased energy usage in offices in the participating institutions; (ii) occupational hazards
                     related to ergonomic conditions for project workers both in office settings and from work-related travels. The TA type
                     activities, including for irrigation programs, policies and investment plans, will be undertaken in compliance with the



Public Disclosure
                     World Bank’s ESSs, with the specific terms of references (TORs) agreed on with the Bank and duly incorporating
                     relevant requirements of the ESSs. Both the implementing agency, AUDA-NEPAD, and the main Technical Services
                     provider to be contracted, IWMI, have experience with past and ongoing Bank funded projects, including under ESF,
                     with overall performance ranging from moderately satisfactory to highly satisfactory. A dedicated regional project
                     management unit has been proposed to oversee the project’s day-to-day implementation, including management of
                     ESF risks and impacts. The unit already has an environmental management expert as the ESF focal point, but the
                     unit’s ESF awareness is still nascent and will need to be enhanced during the preparation and implementation stages.
                     Given the envisaged low to moderate magnitude of the environmental risks, the current level of implementing
                     entities’ experience with Bank’s ESF and past performance, the environmental risk rating is considered Moderate.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project is structured around technical assistance, policy harmonization, capacity building, knowledge sharing, and
                     planning. The project does not directly finance civil works, land acquisition, or investments with immediate physical
                     impacts. However, its outputs—such as policies, plans, and standards—may be adopted and implemented by
                     governments or other actors, potentially leading to significant downstream social impacts, including for example land
                     acquisition, impacts on vulnerable and underserved communities, conflict among water users and disputes over
                     water allocation between farmers and other users which could cause or exacerbate local tensions; increase in the the
                     cost of water for irrigation or alter access to resources for vulnerable and low-income groups; and risk of elites’
                     capture rather than benefits reaching smallholders or marginalized communities. This project is not financing the
                     implementation of such outputs, as that is outside of the project scope but considerations of the downstream risks



                    Feb 09, 2026                                                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project 1 Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Economies Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                     will be included in the TA activities’ TORs and products in line with the ESF provisions. The project's identified risks
                     include: i) risks of unfair treatment, discrimination, and non-compliance with labor standards among project's
                     workers under ESS2; ii) occupational health and safety (OHS) concerns, especially for those involved in fieldwork, data
                     collection, or training activities; iii) risks of sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment (SEA/SH) in connection with
                     fieldwork, data collection, training activities, and workplace interactions; iv) potential exclusion of vulnerable
                     groups—including women, ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities, and individuals living in remote areas—from
                     consultation/participation activities; and v) stakeholder risks, which can lead to potential opposition to certain policy
                     reforms to be supported under C.2, given the social sensitivity of the water sector, particularly in times of scarcity. A
                     SEP will be prepared and implemented to ensure meaningful and inclusive consultations. In addition, Labor
                     management procedures, inclusive of GRM and OHS elements and measures will be detailed in the ESCP and further
                     elaborated in disclosable annexes of the Project Operation Manual. The social risk level of each operation supported
                     by this regional program will be assessed separately based on its supported activities.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The project’s primary focus is on technical assistance, policy harmonization, and capacity building at both regional
                      and national levels, it does have direct and downstream E&S implications. The overall E&S risk is rated as Substantial,
                      reflecting the complexity of multi-country coordination, institutional capacities, and the potential for future



Public Disclosure
                      investments shaped by the project outputs. Given the complexity of the E&S risks in the water sector, with
                      stakeholder, institutional, and consultative challenges, particularly in contexts with limited client capacity to manage
                      E&S risks, including in contexts with active or latent violence, the Project will prepare a regional Strategic
                      Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to integrate E&S considerations in the coordinated investment
                      framework. The SESA, which will be part of the TA to be provided by the project, is expected to guide the preparation
                      of the country-specific E&S risk management instruments (ESIAs, ESMFs, ESMPs, E&S checklists, good practice
                      manuals, etc) in a manner proportional to the E&S risks of the downstream activities to be supported, and following
                      the applicable provisions of the ESF streamlining, promoting their sustainability and facilitating synergies and
                      consistency to the management of E&S risks for common interventions across the different operations in the MPA.
                      The SESA will provide guidance on the management of stakeholder risks, institutional challenges, and capacity
                      strengthening activities, and will also include provisions for the identification and management of risks associated
                      with Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities, biodiversity
                      and ecosystem pressures, and SEA/SH. The outputs of the SESA-informed TA may also recommend actions to improve
                      existing irrigation facilities or new investments with potential interaction with Associated Infrastructure facilities.
                      Where involved, the Associated facilities will need to meet the ESF requirements. To address the project's
                      environmental and social risks and impacts, UNDA-NEPAD will prepare and disclose, by appraisal, an Environmental
                      and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and implement it throughout the project. The TA activities for irrigation programs
                      and investment plans, including SESA preparation, will be undertaken in compliance with the ESF, with the specific
                      TORs subject to prior review and clearance by the Bank to ensure consistency with the ESF.




                    Feb 09, 2026                                                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project 1 Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Economies Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                           Relevant

                      Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure shall be at the heart of the Program and are envisaged as a
                      continuous, ongoing process throughout its lifecycle. This will ensure participation, inclusiveness and transparency to
                      realize cross-country collaboration and adoption of aligned policies. The Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEP) has
                      outlined the stakeholder engagement activities to be carried out by AUDA-NEPAD in line with ESS 10, integrated in
                      the ESCP and will be disclosed prior to appraisal. Main stakeholders will include: participating governments and their
                      agencies; regional agriculture and water research institutions; colleges/universities; farmers; private sector players,
                      NGOs and individual beneficiaries of learning exchange and scholarship programs. Initial stakeholder consultations
                      were conducted as part of the initial project preparatory activities and included the participation of AUDA-NEPAD,
                      International Water Management Institute (IWMI) and SAFGRAD. The consultations focused on the design of the
                      programme activities. A record of the stakeholder engagement activities carried out so far is included in the SEP to be
                      disclosed by Appraisal. Consultations involving the wider network of stakeholders will be conducted on an ongoing
                      basis and meetings to present the project design will take place prior to the appraisal of the project. The SEP includes
                      a grievance mechanism (GM) to address complaints and suggestions coming from both beneficiaries and other
                      interested parties, inclusive of confidential and appropriate mechanisms for handling SEA/SH cases.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                 Relevant

                      Both direct (from AU agencies and partners) and contracted workers (consultants) will be involved in the program to
                      undertake office-based work, fieldwork and data collection as well as training activities. Potential labor risks include
                      unfair treatment and discrimination based on gender and other social factors, in the selection of project training



Public Disclosure
                      facilitators and capacity-building programs, non-compliance with labor standards among project staff, consultants,
                      and other relevant parties, SEA/SH risks at the workplace, and travels into insecure locations exposing workers to
                      security risks. Given the technical nature of activities, minimal to no risks of child labor or forced labor is foreseen. All
                      direct and contracted workers will be formally employed and guided by labor management procedures in line with
                      the provisions of ESS2 to be detailed in the ESCP and elaborated in a disclosable section of the POM, inclusive of
                      workers' grievance mechanism and measures for ensuring OHS as well as preventing SEA/SH.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                  Relevant

                      The Program involves mainly policy dialogue and TA activities that are not envisaged to result in consumption of
                      significant quantities of energy, water or raw materials or emission of significant quantities of greenhouse gases.
                      However, office-based activities as well as operation of regional MIS hub will result in generation of both general and
                      e-wastes. The ESCP will include protocol for management of wastes generated in line with ESF requirements and
                      WBG EHS Guidelines. For type-2 TA activities of the project, the ESCP will include requirements for incorporating
                      relevant ESS3 requirements.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                  Relevant

                      There is direct community health and safety risk related to implementation particularly applied research and
                      downstream planning. Applied research will : i) increase the risk of communicable diseases; ii) road safety hazards;iii)
                      involve use of armed security in FCV locations to guard/escort workers, with potential impacts on both workers and
                      the communities in host locations; and iv) increase SEA/SH during community interactions. The expected durations of


                    Feb 09, 2026                                                                                                          Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project 1 Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Economies Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                      such activities is short and only affecting few sampled locations. Thus, the anticipated overall magnitude and severity
                      of these potential impacts is low. The downstream impact, mainly of Component 2, may potentially increase
                      competition for water resources—such as between upstream and downstream users, or between agricultural and
                      non-agricultural needs—can lead to social conflict and poorly managed irrigation can increase prevalence of water-
                      borne diseases due to standing water and can exacerbate tensions over water allocation. The TA activities will be
                      undertaken in compliance with ESF. The project will plan and implement robust health and safety protocols, including
                      codes of conduct for all workers.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                    Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS5 is not directly relevant to the RISE-RAP project, as the project does not finance activities that would require land
                      acquisition, impose restrictions on land use, or result in involuntary resettlement. All project activities are limited to
                      technical assistance, capacity building, policy development, and knowledge sharing, with no direct support for civil
                      works or infrastructure investments. However, the project’s outputs—such as regional frameworks, investment plans,
                      and technical tools—may inform or guide future investments in irrigation and agricultural water management, which
                      could potentially involve land acquisition or resettlement. These risks will be addressed through the SESA, and will be
                      integrated into the Terms of Reference (TORs) of the TA activities in line with the ESF.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                     Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project's activities will have no ecological foot print. However, implementation of TA outputs without adequate




Public Disclosure
                      safeguards may contribute to habitat loss, decline/loss in biodiversity and ecosystem services, if resultant policies and
                      plans encourage the conversion of natural habitats (wetlands, forests) to irrigated agriculture or promote expansion
                      of irrigation into areas that threaten endangered species and disrupt ecological balances. The relevance of ESS6 will
                      be reassessed during implementation as more detail on potential downstream investments becomes available.
                      Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be conducted to ensure that these risks are identified and
                      managed in line with the mitigation hierarchy in the ESF.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                               Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is relevant to this project, as populations in several participating countries meet the criteria for Indigenous
                      Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities (IP/SSAHUTLCs). The TA
                      activities are not expected to have direct impacts on IP/SSAHUTLC. However, the ToR and outputs for any policy
                      dialogues, studies, capacity building, training and any other technical assistance activities under the Program,
                      including the SESA, will be prepared/conducted in line with ESS7. The SEP provides for adequate stakeholder
                      engagement with the representatives of these groups as needed, and in the participating countries where they are
                      present. The GM will ensure that their feedback can inform the TA under this project, where relevant.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                          Not Currently Relevant

                      The TA activities will not have impacts on physical cultural heritage. However, the future investments resulting from
                      the outputs may intersect with sites of cultural or traditional significance. The TA activities will be undertaken in


                    Feb 09, 2026                                                                                                       Page 8 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Regional Acceleration Project 1 Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Economies Multi-phase
                              Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                      compliance with the ESF by fully incorporating relevant requirements of ESS 8 into the TOR for such TA activities and
                      in the SESA.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                Not Currently Relevant

                      No FIs are envisaged.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            No
                       The project will not use the Borrower's framework.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       No other financing partners are currently envisioned.




Public Disclosure
                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     Actions/Instruments expected during the implementation of the program, to be defined in the project’s ESCP:
                     1. Labor management procedures (to be included as a disclosable section of the project's operational manual, and labor
                     management elements included in the ESCP).
                     2. Establish and ensure Occupational Health and Safety Protocols and the functionality of workers’ GM are
                     implemented throughout the implementation period, in accordance with the timeframes to be defined in the ESCP.
                     3. The TORs of all technical assistance activities under the Program will be reviewed by the Bank to ensure consistency
                     with the ESF.
                     4. To address any potential downstream E&S risks and impacts of programs and investment plans resulting from the TA
                     outputs, a SESA will be prepared and disclosed before rolling out the plans/program’s implementation at the county
                     level.
                     5. SEA/SH Prevention and Action Plan




                     III. CONTACT POINT



                    Feb 09, 2026                                                                                                   Page 9 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Regional Acceleration Project 1 Under The Africa Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Economies Multi-phase
                               Approach (rise-rap) (P512975)


                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Pieter Waalewijn                       Title:          Lead Water Resources Management
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  pwaalewijn@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Si Gou                                 Job Title:      Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  sgou@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Jeren Kabayeva                         Job Title:      Senior Agriculture Specialist

                      Email:                  jkabayeva@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


Public Disclosure
                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                  Pieter Waalewijn, Si Gou, Jeren Kabayeva

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                         Aggrey Ochieng Kwadha

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                Tatiana Tassoni




                    Feb 09, 2026                                                                                                     Page 10 of 10
