Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                 Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Jul-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01375




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
Viet Nam                       P512407                     Sustainable Fisheries Development Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          25-Aug-2025                 26-Feb-2026                   Environment, Natural
                                                                                         Resources & the Blue
                                                                                         Economy
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Finance (MOF)   Ministry of Agriculture and
Financing (IPF)                                            Environment (MAE)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Enhance the management of fisheries sector and increase value-added through upgrading with 'smart infrastructure'


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  To be decided
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            To be decided

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                     181.93

  Total Financing                                                                                          181.93
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                             132.93
  Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                            132.93
  Non-World Bank Group Financing



                                                                                                                 Page 1



                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)


      Counterpart Funding                                                                                                          49.00
        National Government                                                                                                        32.00
        Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                                                                  17.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                              Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                               The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
    1. The broader economic outlook for Viet Nam remains positive, though it is tempered by heightened global
uncertainties. Economic growth is expected to moderate in coming years, with GDP expansion forecast at 6.8% in 2025
before easing to 6.5% in 2026. After a rebound in export performance in 2024, momentum is likely to taper as key trading
partners, including China and the United States, face near-term economic deceleration. Domestically, however, economic
activity is poised to strengthen, driven by a steady recovery in the real estate sector and resilient demand for services. As
one of the world’s most open economies, Viet Nam is vulnerable to shifts in international trade and growth trends.
Additionally, escalating trade policy shifts, including protectionist measures or geopolitical realignments, may disrupt
supply chains and reduce export competitiveness.1
    2. Viet Nam’s Blue Economy is an important engine of economic growth. The economic inputs of the 28 coastal
provinces account for an estimated 60 percent of the national GDP.2 Viet Nam’s blue economy depends on the productivity
and health of marine resources. Following on expanded periods of overexploitation, the protection and sustainability of
these resources is a core priority reflected in the 2018 Strategy for the Sustainable Development of Viet Nam’s Marine
Economy by 2030 and is included in the vision for 2045 (Marine Strategy).3 The Marine Strategy prioritizes prosperity,
safety, and resilience of coastal communities, where over half of the country’s population resides. Improved fisheries
sector governance, recovery of Viet Nam’s fish stock, strengthened international and domestic market reputation, and
higher fish food quality are also key priorities of the Fisheries Development Strategy 2030.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context
     3. Viet Nam’s fisheries sector is a cornerstone of the nation’s economy, contributing 5 percent to GDP annually and
 supporting 4.7 million jobs. The country’s extensive coastline and water resources provide an ideal environment for both
 capture fisheries and aquaculture. Approximately 10 percent of the population depends directly or indirectly on the
 fisheries supply chain. Viet Nam is the third-largest fish exporter globally, with 2023 exports reaching a record $9 billion.


1 World Bank (2025). Taking Stock. Viet Nam Economic Update, March 2025
2 “Blue Economy Scenarios for Viet Nam” (UNDP 2022), www.undp.org/Viet Nam/publications/blue-economy-scenarios-viet-nam (p. iv).
3 Resolution 36-NQ/TW adopted by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Viet Nam in 2018.



                                                                                                                                     Page 2



                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)


 The country is also the world's third-largest producer of farmed shrimp4 and its broader aquaculture production, which
 contributes 54 percent of production volume and 75 percent of the sector's value, continues to grow with over 500,000
 aquaculture farms now operating nationwide.5 However, decades of unsustainable capture fisheries exploitation have
 led to declining fish stocks.
    4. The Government’s Marine Strategy 2030 and concurrent fisheries legislation updates, including the National
 Development Program for Efficient and Sustainable Capture Fisheries toward 2030, set out to reform the sector and
 reduce stock decline by reducing total catch volumes while promoting more value-oriented, high-tech industrial
 approaches. In line with its renewed emphasis on sector sustainability, modernization, and economic growth, the
 Government of Viet Nam (GOV) aims to reduce nearshore fishing to prevent overexploitation, while promoting offshore
 and ocean fishing in ways that align with marine ecosystem regeneration. Infrastructure and logistics improvements,
 such as upgrading fishing ports and supporting cooperative enterprises, play a crucial role in increasing efficiency and
 competitiveness in the sector. The strategy also prioritizes climate resilience by implementing measures to adapt to
 climate change, protecting marine biodiversity, and promoting the sustainable use of aquatic resources. Yet, achieving
 the Marine Strategy objectives continues to be hampered by underlying challenges that need to be addressed. Key
 challenges to sustainable growth of Viet Nam’s fisheries sector stem from (a) management, productivity and quality
 gaps, and (b) climate change impacts. Rehabilitating and upgrading the fishery sector’s infrastructure is an important
 factor in addressing identified challenges and in advancing the implementation of the Marine Strategy’s goals. While the
 GOV is already taking significant steps toward improving fisheries management and reducing IUU fishing, critical
 infrastructural deficits and lacking technological innovation across both the harvest and the post-harvest sector segments
 continue to pose significant barriers to the effective implementation of technological solutions in fisheries.
    5. Viet Nam aims to leverage strategic investments in infrastructure and technology modernization for sustainable
 growth of the sector. These investments include modernization of fishing ports and stepping up the implementation of
 Blue Fishing Port standards. To strengthen the environmental, economic, and social sustainability of aquaculture
 production, the Government aims to foster the adoption of mangrove-friendly aquaculture practices. The proposed
 Sustainable Fisheries Development operation (SFDP) will directly support GOV’s Marine Strategy implementation efforts
 toward strengthening climate resilience, promoting responsible fisheries management, and expanding sustainable
 aquaculture. It is further intended to contribute to addressing over-exploitation in capture fisheries by improving stock
 assessments, refining quota regulations, and strengthening data collection systems, aligned with the strategy’s goal of
 balancing exploitation and conservation.

 Relationship to CPF
    6. The SFDP is closely aligned with the World Bank’s Viet Nam Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2018-2025. By
 investing in smart technical solutions, such as modernized, climate-resilient fishing ports, digital monitoring systems, and
 traceability tools, the project directly supports CPF high-level outcomes, including enhanced climate resilience,
 sustainable economic growth, increased private sector participation, and job creation. The project will promote
 sustainable sector growth by increasing the competitiveness of seafood products through improved productivity and
 export quality, while responding to climate adaptation needs in coastal fishery areas by building resilience to saline
 intrusion and supporting livelihood diversification. Furthermore, the SFDP will contribute to the sustainable management
 of natural resources and improved environmental stewardship by tackling overfishing, strengthening fisheries resource
 governance, and supporting compliance with international standards for sustainable trade and market access.


4 FAO, 2020. GLOBEFISH Highlights April 2020 Issue, with Annual 2019 Statistics - A quarterly update on world seafood markets
5 World Bank. (2018). Viet Nam fisheries sector report. Retrieved from

https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099735406282210211/pdf/P167307010855d0b00b3d80c3bb29c6e78a.pdf

                                                                                                                                        Page 3



                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)


C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Enhance the management of fisheries sector and increase value-added through upgrading with 'smart infrastructure'

 Key Results (From PCN)

  (a) Reduced post-harvest losses in project areas (disaggregated by province and port facilities).
  (a) Improved monitoring for infractions of fisheries regulations at project ports and monitoring centers.
  (b) Project-supported households in the Mekong Delta with increased resilience to climate change impacts
      (disaggregated by gender).

D. Concept Description
    7. The long-term objective of the SFDP is to promote sustainable growth in the fisheries sector through investments
in "smart" infrastructure, logistics, and capacity building for sustainable fisheries management. Thus, the SFDP will
support GOV to set the sector on a sustainable path for expanding production beyond its already strong performance.
This will be achieved by modernized port facilities, improved logistics, and enhanced monitoring systems, all of which will
allow for reduction in post-harvest losses, improved traceability, and increased production value of fisheries, while
promoting environmental sustainability and social inclusiveness. Modernized ports will ensure better handling of catches,
maintaining freshness and quality, thus enabling higher market prices and incentivizing fishermen to adhere to high
standards.

   8. Support to aquaculture farming will target clustering, improved input quality, compliance with Good Aquaculture
Practices (GAP), and expanding market access. Infrastructure investments will include climate-smart ports, storm
shelters, vessel monitoring systems, and upgraded shrimp hatcheries to support sustainable resource management and
improve community incomes. Enhanced port state control capacity and traceability systems will facilitate better
management of capture fisheries, contributing to the recovery of fish stocks. Capacity building at both central and
provincial levels, including infrastructure improvements and demonstration sites for advanced shrimp farming, will
ensure that the project’s holistic and environmentally sound approach benefits both direct and indirect stakeholders.

   9. The SFDP is proposed as an Investment Project Financing (IPF) implemented in compliance with GOV’s normative
requirements for the use of IBRD recourses and for separation of institutional roles and fiscal accountability. To this end,
the Ministry of Agriculture and Environment (MAE) and the Kien Giang and Soc Trang provinces have developed and are
ready to implement a set of economically feasible discrete interventions as follows:

  MAE: Project activities are intended to support and advance Viet Nam’s Marine Strategy implementation efforts by the
  GOV. The proposed work is aimed at enhancing the management and increasing the value of target fisheries in Viet
  Nam by investing in smart infrastructure, providing technical assistance, and strengthening institutional capacities.
  Implemented by the MAE at the national level, project investments will support improving capture fisheries
  sustainability and value-addition. Project activities will contribute to the realization of strategic sector development
  goals by reducing post-harvest losses, improving seafood quality, and promoting sustainable fisheries practices. The
  MAE will be directly responsible for the management and coordination of project interventions and engagement of
  relevant agencies and stakeholders. Respectively, the project will finance services, infrastructure works, goods and
  equipment intended to ensure that Viet Nam's fisheries sector can improve its climate resilience and capacity to meet
  the demands of the international and domestic markets, while strengthening its environmental and social safeguards
  and GAP practices.


                                                                                                                        Page 4



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)


   Kien Giang: Project activities will contribute to Kien Giang Provincial Government’s objective to enhance capacity for
   production management and the organization of sustainable fisheries sector development, build and upgrade climate-
   resilient infrastructure, and advance technology innovation. To this end, the project will finance services, works, goods
   and equipment intended to enhance climate-resilient community livelihoods through sustainable aquaculture practices
   and improved aquaculture infrastructure.

   Soc Trang: Project activities are expected to contribute to the Soc Trang Provincial Government’s efforts to modernize
   infrastructure, enhance the management capacity and efficiency of capture fishery and aquaculture and management
   capacity, and increase the value of seafood products. They are also intended to contribute to the promotion of climate
   change adaptation and sustainable growth. To this end, the project will finance services, works, goods and equipment
   intended to strengthen management and technological capacity for sustainable fisheries development while
   rehabilitating and upgrading selected climate-resilient fisheries infrastructure.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                      Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



The main environmental risks and impacts during pre-construction and construction include: (i) safety risks related to
unexploded ordnance (UXO); (ii) pollution from dust, waste, and wastewater; (iii) water and soil pollution and impacts on
aquatic biodiversity due to improper management and disposal of dredged materials; (iv) risks of erosion and subsidence
during the construction of embankments and wharfs; (v) disruption of waterway traffic and disturbances from
transporting leveling and excavated materials; and (vi) health and safety risks to the community and workers. These
impacts are short-term, moderate to substantial in scale, and reversible. Key environmental risks during operation include:
(i) potential soil and water pollution from oil leakage from vessels and improper management of solid waste and
wastewater at ports; (ii) contamination of aquatic systems and health risks from overuse of chemicals/medicine in shrimp
cultivation; (iii) risk of land salinization and water pollution from saline shrimp farms; and (iv) occupational and community
health and safety risks during port operation. These impacts are long-term, reversible, and can be mitigated through
appropriate design and management practices. The implementing agencies have limited experience with the
Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). Given the project's type, location, sensitivity, scale, and the implementing
agencies' capacity to manage environmental risks, the environmental risk is assessed as substantial.

Key social risks include those related to land acquisition and resettlement (LAR), impacts on the livelihoods of ethnic
minorities (EMs), and risks related to labor conditions and community health and safety. Infrastructure upgrades will
require land acquisition, physical relocation, and restricted access to livelihood opportunities. Social risks and impacts
include: (i) loss of land, assets, livelihoods, and properties due to permanent and temporary land acquisition and
relocation; (ii) disruption of livelihood activities for farmers and fishers due to construction and operation of fishery

                                                                                                                          Page 5



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)


infrastructure; (iii) labor influx and related community safety risks; (iv) resistance to adapting new livelihood models; (v)
potential adverse impacts on welfare from failed livelihood models; (vi) uneven access to project benefits among
vulnerable groups; (vii) relocation of graves; and (viii) health risks from overuse of antibiotics/chemicals in production
activities. The government and implementing agencies have limited capacity in LAR processes, budgeting, and complaint
resolution. These potential impacts require appropriate mitigation plans to be developed and effectively implemented
during project preparation and implementation. While the implementing agencies have experience managing World Bank
safeguards, they have limited experience with labor conditions and community health and safety under the ESF. The
substantial social risk rating is due to land acquisition, potential household relocation, and a large labor force, the
challenges with GRM/GRS and PCAPs cases related to land acquisition/livelihood programs, which highlight institutional
weaknesses in E&S management. The impacts on EMs could be more acute, but the numbers affected are not expected
to exceed the implementing agencies' capacity to mitigate.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Milen F. Dyoulgerov Vollen
   Senior Environmental Specialist

   Thu Thi Le Nguyen
   Senior Environmental Specialist

   Phuong Hoang Ai Nguyen
   Senior Environmental Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Finance (MOF)

 Implementing Agencies
  Ministry of Agriculture and Environment (MAE)
  Sao Pham
  Project Director
  sao.crsd@gmail.com

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



                                                                                                                         Page 6



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Milen F. Dyoulgerov Vollen, Thu Thi Le Nguyen, Phuong Hoang Ai Nguyen

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Africa Eshogba Olojoba                18-Jun-2025

Country Director:                       Mariam J. Sherman                     03-Jul-2025




                                                                                                                Page 7



                                                                                                     Official Use Only
