Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Learning Enhancement and Acceleration in Primary Education in Bangladesh(P512645)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDPC00200




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Learning Enhancement and Acceleration in Primary Education in Bangladesh(P512645)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                          Learning Enhancement and
Bangladesh                     SOUTH ASIA                   P512645                       Acceleration in Primary
                                                                                          Education in Bangladesh
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               03-May-2026                  13-Aug-2026                   Education
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Directorate of Primary
People's Republic of           Education Under Ministry
Bangladesh                     of Primary and Mass
                               Education (MoPME)

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
To enhance foundational literacy and numeracy for all children in participating schools and strengthen the education
system performance from pre-primary to grade 5.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                   3,700.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                      3,005.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                      3,000.00
    IPF Component                                                                                                 5.00
  Total Financing                                                                                           2,300.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                  705.00



                                                                                                                    Page 1



                                                                                                           Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Learning Enhancement and Acceleration in Primary Education in Bangladesh(P512645)


 FINANCING
   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                              300.00
     World Bank Lending                                                                                          300.00
   Total Government Contribution                                                                                2,000.00


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.        Bangladesh made rapid economic and social progress in recent decades, reaching lower middle-income status
in 2015. Stable macroeconomic conditions underpinned an average annual real GDP growth of 6.3 percent between 2011
and 2024, and the poverty rate declined and now stands at 18.7 percent. However, the pace of GDP growth and poverty
reduction moderated over the past few years. An interim government was sworn in August 8, 2024, after the former Prime
Minister resigned and left the country amid a youth-led mass uprising.
2.        Real GDP growth moderated to 3.7 percent in FY25 from 4.2 percent in FY24, driven largely by a slowdown in
investment. Investment activities have remained subdued due to political uncertainty, elevated raw material and
borrowing costs, and lending restrictions at some banks. At the same time, external sector pressures eased, with rising
foreign exchange reserves underpinned by stronger remittance inflows. Inflation averaged 10 percent in FY25. It
moderated to average 8.4 percent in H1 of FY26 but remains elevated. Monetary policy has remained tight to bring down
inflation. The financial sector remains vulnerable to high nonperforming loans and weak governance, prompting corrective
actions by the government. Real GDP growth is projected to rise to 4.6 percent in FY26, driven by an increase in private
consumption which is expected to be supported by moderating inflation. Investment is expected to improve relative to
FY25 but remain subdued, reflecting election-related political uncertainty and ongoing vulnerabilities in the banking
sector.
3.        Bangladesh is highly vulnerable to cyclones, floods, and other climate shocks. A tropical cyclone brings heavy
rainfall, very high wind speeds, and storm surges, resulting in average annual losses of approximately US$1 billion every
two to three years1. Nearly 56 percent of the population lives in “high climate exposure areas” as the projected sea-level
rise of 0.5 meters intensifies storm surge risk2. During a wet monsoon season, between 22-30 percent of Bangladesh is
inundated, while droughts during the pre-monsoon season tend to impact between three to four million hectares of crop
land3.

 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program




                                                                                                                      Page 2



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Learning Enhancement and Acceleration in Primary Education in Bangladesh(P512645)


4.       Bangladesh operates one of the world’s largest primary education systems, serving over 20 million children
through a diverse mix of government and non-government institutions. Over the past two decades, major investments
and programs have led to near-universal primary school enrollment, significant progress in completion rates, and gender
parity, though disparities persist, particularly among the disadvantaged populations. While Government Primary Schools
(GPSs) account for about half of all schools and students, a variety of non-government schools—including those run by
Non-Governmental Organization (NGOs), kindergartens, and madrasas—make up nearly half of the system. Oversight and
support are provided primarily by the Ministry of Primary and Mass Education (MoPME). However, some institutions, such
as Qawmi madrasas, remain outside government regulations, and overall government support for non-government
schools remains limited.

5.      Despite these advances, Bangladesh faces a serious learning crisis. Fifty-one percent of ten-year-olds are unable
to read and understand age-appropriate text, and many students fail to demonstrate proficiency in core subjects like
Bangla and Mathematics. Contributing factors include weak instructional practices, leadership shortages, inadequate
school infrastructure, climate disruptions, and low education funding. These issues hinder the development of vital
foundational skills that are essential for student progression and future employability. As Bangladesh prepares for the
next stage of education reform with its Fifth Primary Education Development Program (PEDP5), there is an urgent need
to focus not just on access, but on ensuring equitable and high-quality learning outcomes that equip all students for the
demands of a changing workforce and society.

 Relationship to CAS/CPF

6.      The Learning Enhancement and Acceleration in Primary Education in Bangladesh (LEAP-BD) Program is
strategically aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2023–2027, particularly under
CPF Objective 4: “Improved quality and equitable access for human capital development services”. By targeting
Foundational Learning and Numeracy (FLN), LEAP-BD directly supports this objective by strengthening education quality.
Furthermore, by promoting equitable outcomes across the country and narrowing the learning gap in disadvantaged and
remote areas, the Program advances the CPF’s overarching goal of socioeconomic inclusion by reaching underserved
populations.

  Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument

7.      This is a key opportunity to partner with the Government of Bangladesh through PEDP5, as the focus shifts from
expanding access to enhancing foundational learning and service quality using scalable, evidence-based interventions.
PEDP5 emphasizes school leadership, data-driven responses to learning gaps, and integrates proven methods like
structured pedagogy and remedial instruction to enhance the outcomes of foundational learning. The program aligns with
the World Bank's goal to halve learning poverty in South Asia and complements other World Bank Group-financed projects
supporting skills and employability enhancement, jobs, early childhood development, as well as household security in
Bangladesh.

8.       A Program-for-Results (PforR) instrument with an Investment Project Financing (IPF) technical assistance (TA)
component is an appropriate financing modality. The previous Quality Learning for All Program (QLEAP) (P162619) used
a PforR instrument for the first time in the sector, being a well-received by the government and having positive outcomes
A PforR is proposed for this operation because: (i) the Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) provide a stronger focus on
accountability for results and outcomes and incentivize government’s ownership and the implementation of critical
reforms and policies; (ii) the PforR uses and strengthens the country systems, including fiduciary, safeguards, and
monitoring and evaluation for Program implementation; (iii) the PforR provides flexibility, agility, and efficiency


                                                                                                                     Page 3



                                                                                                             Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Learning Enhancement and Acceleration in Primary Education in Bangladesh(P512645)


encouraging different and sustainable solutions to challenges and scaling them up within a large national program; and
(iv) within PEDP5, the PforR instrument supports the greatest impact on results in the areas the World Bank Group
support. A small IPF component will be used to bring in some critical technical expertise in new areas of engagement
where the QLEAP experience showed limitations.. The TA support will help generate evidence and strengthen capacity in
priority areas such as pre-primary education, education technologies, and data quality for decision-making.

 C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

  Program Development Objective(s)
 To enhance foundational literacy and numeracy for all children in participating schools and strengthen the education
 system performance from pre-primary to grade 5.


 PDO Level Results Indicators

The following indicators will track progress against the PDO:

    -   PDO1: Foundational Literacy outcomes: Grade 3 students achieving minimum proficiency in Bangla (percent,
        disaggregated by gender at the national level)
    -   PDO2: Foundational Numeracy outcomes: Grade 3 students achieving minimum proficiency in mathematics
        (percent, disaggregated by gender at the national level)
    -   PDO3: Equity in learning outcomes: Reduced gap between mean scale scores of the lowest performing and
        highest performing districts in grade 5 in Bangla (percent, disaggregated by gender in all districts)
    -   PDO4: Strengthened education system performance: Head teacher positions filled by individuals trained on the
        revised leadership training (percent)
    -   IO aligned with the scorecard: Students supported with better education (number)


 D. Program Description

 PforR Program Boundary

9.      The PEDP5 envisions a transformative shift in Bangladesh’s primary education system, to be implemented over
five years, expected to commence in July 2026. It focuses on ensuring equitable access and improving learning outcomes,
particularly in FLN, among primary school-aged children. By 2030, the program aims to increase enrolment of 5+ year-old
children in Pre Primary Education (PPE) to strengthen school readiness and support the achievement of Sustainable
Development Goal 4.2 (“ensure all children get quality early childhood development, care, and pre-primary education by
2030”). PEDP5 also seeks to reduce disparities across gender, geographic location, socioeconomic status, and disability,
and a reduction in the proportion of out-of-school children aged 6–10. Out of the 20.18 million children enrolled in primary
education, 10.6 million are enrolled in government primary schools, which form the program’s core beneficiary group
under the Ministry’s direct mandate. For the more than 9 million children enrolled in kindergartens, private schools, and
madrasas, which are outside this mandate, PEDP5 is intentionally structured to create systemwide spillovers through
stronger curricula, improved assessment systems, enhanced teacher development frameworks, and expanded digital
learning resources that non-government providers can choose to adopt.


                                                                                                                        Page 4



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Learning Enhancement and Acceleration in Primary Education in Bangladesh(P512645)


10.     The LEAP-BD Program will support implementation of PEDP5 adopt system-strengthening approaches to
address binding constraints with a clear focus on improving school-level service delivery. This means that activities (i)
are integrated into the regular staffing, procedures, and financing modalities of the Directorate of Primary Education (DPE)
and MoPME; (ii) have a sustainable source of financing for maintaining these activities; and (iii) are designed so that they
can reach all the relevant target population across the country, either within the period of the Program or beyond.

11.      Results Area 1 – Improve FLN and Teaching Practice through Structured Pedagogy: This results area will support
the development and nationwide implementation of an inclusive FLN package for grades 1 to 3 in participating schools,
including improved teaching and learning materials (textbooks and teachers’ guides leveraging best practices of teaching
methods) to strengthen FLN from the earliest grades, aligned with the curriculum and designed to provide clear and
practical guidance for teachers. A strong emphasis will be placed on continuous professional development (skill-oriented
and practice-based) for all teachers in these grades, to improve their subject knowledge, instructional practices, and use
of classroom-based formative and summative assessments to diagnose student progress and address learning gaps. This
will also strengthen mechanisms for classroom observation, feedback, and mentoring for teachers, which are critical to
continuing improvements in teaching quality.

12.      Results Area 2 – Improve Equity of Learning Outcomes: This area will focus on reducing disparities in learning
outcomes by providing targeted remediation to children who are not achieving grade-level proficiency. Building lessons
from the pilot under QLEAP, the Program will review, refine, and roll out the national remedial education framework
under which schools will prepare and implement institutional level plans to adapt the model to their specific context. A
phase-wise expansion strategy complemented by a remedial education package (teacher training, learning materials and
assessments) will be provided to participating schools. All primary school teachers and head teachers in participating
schools will receive training to effectively apply these approaches, ensuring that children who are falling behind can catch
up with their peers. The Program will also place strong emphasis on improving the quality of pre-primary education.
Finally, the Program will invest in creating safe and conducive learning environments through targeted infrastructure
maintenance support. This will focus on the provision and maintenance of Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) facilities
accessible to all children.

13.       Results Area 3 – Strengthened Education System Performance: The third results area will enhance the overall
performance and accountability of the education system by focusing on head teachers, school-based improvement
planning, and education financing. For head teachers, the focus will be on strengthening the policy and implementation
framework for head teachers, including their selection, deployment, capacity development, roles, and responsibilities, to
ensure all schools are led by capable and motivated leaders. The Program will incentivize filling vacant positions with
trained head teachers and strengthen school leadership by updating and implementing a national framework for all school
leaders centered on improving student learning outcomes. School-based improvement planning will be strengthened by
revisiting the School Level Improvement Plan (SLIP) guidelines. Building lessons from QLEAP, the scope and modalities of
SLIPs will be adapted to provide schools with greater autonomy and flexibility to innovate and focus on interventions for
improving learning, such as increasing contact time, improving need-based facilities for greener and safer schools, and
enhancing community and parental engagement to improve the home environment for learning. Finally, this results area
will address the critical challenge of education financing efficiency through promoting better alignment of MoPME’s
budget with PEDP5 priorities, particularly the quality of FLN, and strengthening mechanisms for improved resource
utilization.

14.    A TA component (US$5 million) using an IPF modality will finance consulting and non-consulting services to
support the capacity development of relevant counterparts and agencies in specific areas, including (i) student learning
assessments; (ii) innovative pilots in Artificial Intelligence (AI) in education; (iii) strengthening data system management

                                                                                                                        Page 5



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Learning Enhancement and Acceleration in Primary Education in Bangladesh(P512645)


and quality; (iv) improving system resilience during school closures by building on significant investments made under the
predecessor program to make remote learning modalities and alternative delivery mechanisms more user-friendly and
widely accessible; (v) fiduciary and safeguard management; and (vi) undertaking other need-based assessments and
evaluation studies.

15.     Implementation Arrangements: The proposed Program will use the government systems for Program
implementation, oversight, financial management, procurement, safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, and reporting
arrangements, based on the lessons learnt under QLEAP. The DPE under MoPME will serve as the executing agency and
will have overall responsibility for Program implementation, while other relevant government agencies, such as the
National Academy for Primary Education (NAPE), Bureau of Non-Formal Education (BNFE), and the National Curriculum
and Textbook Board (NCTB), are expected to support the successful implementation of the Program in relevant areas. An
Inter-ministerial Program Steering Committee (IPSC) will be established under MoPME to oversee the coordination,
monitoring, and implementation of LEAP-BD. A Program Coordination Unit will be formed within DPE, headed by and
consisting mainly of government officers, for coordinating implementation, monitoring, and supervision of activities.

16.      Fiduciary Systems Assessment: Procurement under the PforR component will rely on national systems and the
Electronic Government Procurement (e-GP) platform while a small IPF component (US$5 million) will be clearly ring-
fenced and implemented in accordance with the World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers (September
2025) and applicable Financial Management (FM) policies. Under the PforR, procurement will be carried out by the DPE
using the public procurement act and rules and the national e-GP system, covering learning materials, ICT, training
services, school-level maintenance (including WASH), and logistics linked to Disbursement Linked Results (DLRs). An
Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment (IFSA) will be undertaken during preparation, covering procurement, FM, and
anti-corruption systems, and will be sector-specific and evidence-based, drawing on recent experience from the 4th
Primary Education Development Program (PEDP4) and QLEAP. Fiduciary risk is assessed as Substantial at concept stage,
reflecting capacity constraints in procurement planning, contract management and budget execution. Based on the IFSA
findings, mitigation measures will be appropriately calibrated and incorporated through legal covenants, DLIs, the
Program Action Plan, and the Program Operations Manual, with targeted capacity development supported through the
IPF component.

 E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening

17.      Environmental and Social Assessment: The environmental and social (ES) risk for both the PforR and IPF
component has been assessed as Moderate, resulting in an overall Moderate ES risk rating. The PforR will support school
WASH facilities through upgrading and maintenance, without major construction or land acquisition. Activities will involve
assessing existing WASH blocks and water sources, addressing functionality gaps, and implementing corrective measures.
Key considerations include safe collection and disposal of fecal sludge, proper wastewater and drainage management,
and environmentally sound disposal of e-waste from ICT use. Limited construction and maintenance may pose labor risks
such as inadequate Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) compliance, insufficient use of protective equipment, and
accident hazards during repair or desludging. A preliminary Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH)
screening of the project using the Education SEA/SH Risk Assessment tool was done based on the IPF component and the
risk rating is Moderate The ES risks, including SEA/SH risks, associated with these will be further assessed during the
appraisal. An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) report would be prepared prior appraisal. SEA/SH risk
assessment will be conducted across the entire PforR component and be integrated to the extent feasible into the ESSA.
Any gap filling measure (for ES including SEA/SH), if necessary, would be included in the Program Action Plan PAP.




                                                                                                                      Page 6



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Learning Enhancement and Acceleration in Primary Education in Bangladesh(P512645)


18.      The IPF will finance consulting and non-consulting services to support the capacity development of relevant
counterparts in learning assessments, innovative pilots in AI in education, climate change and air quality, strengthening
data system management, fiduciary and ES management. The IPF would neither support nor would it be used to design
any construction. No biodiversity, natural/critical habitat, ecosystem, or living natural resources will also be affected. This
component will not include any land acquisition or resettlement activities. No adverse impacts on community health and
safety, small ethnic communities, and cultural heritage are expected. The studies supported by the component might have
some ES risk related to the downstream activities. An ES Screening will be undertaken during appraisal stage, and an
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) integrating relevant Labor Management Procedures and Stakeholder
Engagement Plan as necessary will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal.

19.     Paris Alignment. The operation is consistent with Bangladesh’s National Adaptation Plan (NAP) and National Plan
for Disaster Management 2021-2025 commitments under Paris Agreement. The operation contributes to Bangladesh’s
goals of sustainable development and climate adaptation by building human capital and resilience to future shocks
through (i) incorporating awareness raising activities as part of the curriculum, (ii) following NAP norms in all the civil
works, and (iii) promoting a climate-aware generation through extra-curricular activities. The project has been screened
for climate change impacts and disasters.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                       Policies                                                      Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                             No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                       No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Matiullah Noori
   Senior Education Economist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  People's Republic of Bangladesh

 Implementing Agencies



                                                                                                                           Page 7



                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Learning Enhancement and Acceleration in Primary Education in Bangladesh(P512645)


 Directorate of Primary Education Under Ministry of Primary and Mass Education (MoPME)

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                                                                 Page 8



                                                                                         Official Use Only
