Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Water Secure Haryana Program(P512898)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                              Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 02-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDPC00201




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Water Secure Haryana Program(P512898)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                     Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                        Water Secure Haryana
India                          SOUTH ASIA                 P512898
                                                                                        Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               02-Feb-2026                30-Jul-2026                   Water
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Irrigation & Water
India                          Resources Department,
                               Government of Haryana

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
To strengthen water resources management and agricultural services for efficient and improved water use in Haryana.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  To be decided
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            Yes

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                      714.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                         714.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                     712.75
    Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                                                             1.25
  Total Financing                                                                                              714.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

FINANCING
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                             500.00

                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                        Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Water Secure Haryana Program(P512898)


       World Bank Lending                                                                                                                                   500.00
    Total Government Contribution                                                                                                                           214.00


  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.       Agriculture remains a critical pillar of India’s economy, and its resilience increasingly depends on effective water
management and governance. The sector contributes about 17 percent to GDP but employs nearly 45 percent of the
labor force, underscoring its role in sustaining rural livelihoods and food security. India is among the world’s top producers
of rice, wheat, and pulses, yet productivity is uneven and increasingly vulnerable to climate change. Erratic monsoons,
rising temperatures, and extreme weather events are driving yield variability and land and water degradation. These risks
are already impacting food prices, rural incomes, and employment. Strengthening agricultural resilience through improved
water productivity and governance is central to inclusive growth and sustainability.
2.      The state of Haryana makes an outsized contribution to India’s economy and food security. With a per-capita
income of INR 319,000 (US$3,757), it ranks seventh among Indian states, well above the national average of INR 189,000.
Despite covering only 1.3 percent of India’s land, Haryana produces over 6 percent of food grains,1 supplies 11 percent of
rice and wheat to the Public Distribution System, and contributes 5 percent of India’s agricultural exports,2 including 40
percent of basmati exports. This performance is underpinned by 3.84 million hectares (ha) of cultivable land, 82 percent
of which is irrigated.3
 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program

3.       Water stress threatens Haryana’s agricultural output and productivity. Haryana’s water resources are scarce.
Productivity is increasingly undermined by scarce water, an arid climate, variable rainfall,4 rising demand, ageing
infrastructure, and inefficient irrigation. Rivers such as the Yamuna and seasonal streams are prone to floods and droughts,
a risk amplified by climate change. Heavy reliance on groundwater strains fast-depleting aquifers, while the state’s bowl-
shaped topography causes waterlogging and salinity in central districts, reducing yields. Addressing these challenges is
essential for sustaining Haryana’s role in food security.
4.       Haryana is experiencing an increasingly unsustainable water deficit that is exacerbated by inefficient water use
in agriculture. In 2023, total demand was 42 bcm – 84.4 percent from agriculture – against renewable availability of only


1 Department of Economic and Statistical Affairs, Economic Survey of Haryana 2024-25, Government of Haryana, pp. 3, 39
2 Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA), AgriExchange – Production Statistics, accessed June 27, 2025,

https://agriexchange.apeda.gov.in/Production/Indiacat/Index.
3 The state's irrigation infrastructure relies heavily on the Bhakra Canal System (1.42 M ha) and the Western Yamuna Canal (1.3 M ha).
4 Average annual rainfall is around 560 mm, ranging from less than 300 mm in the arid south-western regions to over 1000 mm in the hilly tracts of the Shivalik Hills




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 2



                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Water Secure Haryana Program(P512898)


30 bcm, creating a 12 bcm gap.5 This is currently covered by across-the-board deficits and unsustainable groundwater
extraction. Rising population, urbanization, and industrial demand will deepen shortages unless urgent technical,
institutional, and climate adaptation reforms reduce consumption and improve efficiency.
5.      Despite high productivity, Haryana’s agriculture is characterized by low water use efficiency. Wheat–rice
rotations dominate nearly three-fifths of farmland, with high yields but enormous water demand. Flood irrigation,
including pre-ponding rice fields, causes major seepage and evaporation losses. Area-based irrigation charges offer little
incentive to save water. Since 2020, the Mera Pani, Meri Virasat scheme has promoted less water-intensive crops through
cash incentives, while micro-irrigation is being scaled up, though adoption remains only 13 percent of cultivable command
area.
6.       Haryana’s irrigation system is built around an extensive but ageing canal infrastructure, spanning over 14,000
km. Much of it was constructed with tile or brick lining that has deteriorated, causing high losses and inequitable delivery
between upstream and downstream. Surface water supply is also inconsistent, depending on inter-state allocations from
Ravi-Beas, Sutlej, and Yamuna Rivers, which fluctuate with basin availability. In 2020-21, Haryana received only 67 percent
of its share. As canals deteriorate, farmers increasingly rely on groundwater, now irrigating 63 percent of farmland through
tubewells. Over two decades, tubewell area expanded 42 percent, while canal-irrigated area declined 17 percent, a shift
encouraged by pump and electricity subsidies.
7.       This growing dependence on groundwater has resulted in severe and worsening aquifer stress across the state.
Of 143 groundwater assessment units, 88 (61.5%) are ‘Over-Exploited’, 11 ‘Critical’, and 8 ‘Semi-Critical’, leaving only 36
‘Safe’. Over 60 percent of recharge-worthy land lies in over-exploited zones.6 Between 2000 and 2024, average water
table depth dropped from 10.75 to 22.76 meters.7 Farmers now face rising costs for deeper wells and higher-capacity
pumps, while the long-term trajectory signals a deepening sustainability crisis.
8.      Waterlogging and salinity in the central districts further constrain Haryana’s agricultural potential. The bowl-
shaped topography traps water in central lowlands, where poor drainage and canal seepage cause widespread
waterlogging and salinity. Around 7-8 percent of land is affected, across 14 districts.8 Soil degradation reduces yields and,
in some cases, forces land abandonment. In 2023, 7.1 percent of land was moderately or highly salt-affected.9 These
conditions demand better drainage and adoption of salt-tolerant crop varieties.
9.       Increased climate variability is amplifying Haryana’s already complex water management challenges. Between
1951 and 2018, maximum temperatures rose by 0.04-0.08°C and minimums by 0.05-0.1°C per year.10 Heatwaves have
intensified, boosting evapotranspiration and disrupting monsoon timing. Rainfall is declining overall but with more
localized floods and longer dry spells. These trends worsen groundwater depletion and waterlogging, while warmer
winters increase pest attacks. Crop yields face risks, with irrigated wheat and rice projected to decline 15-17 percent by
mid-century11 without efficiency and resilience measures.
10.    Recognizing the urgency of water challenges, the Government of Haryana (GoH) has elevated Integrated Water
Resources Management (IWRM) and water security as strategic priorities across its planning and institutional reforms.
In 2020, the Haryana Water Resources Authority (HWRA) was created to integrate groundwater and surface water
management. In 2023, with Irrigation and Water Resources Department (IWRD), Department of Agriculture and Farmers’

5 Haryana Integrated Water Resources Action Plan, 2025.
6 Central Ground Water Board, “Dynamic Ground Water Resources of India – GWRA-2024,” (CGWB, 2024), p. 74.
7 Haryana Water Resources Authority, Haryana Water Resources Atlas 2025, pp. 121-122, “Average Depth to Water Table Post-Monsoon 2000-2024” and

“Categorization of Villages on the basis of Ground Water Level on June 2024”.
8 Haryana Water Resources Authority, Haryana Water Resources Atlas 2025, p. 50, “Waterlogged Area (Pre-monsoon)”.
9 Haryana Water Resources Authority, Haryana Water Resources Atlas 2025, p. 116, “Salt Affected Areas (2023)”.

10 Department of Environment and Climate Change, Government of Haryana, Revised State Action Plan on Climate Change – Haryana, 2023, p. 40.
11 Department of Environment and Climate Change, Government of Haryana, Revised State Action Plan on Climate Change – Haryana, 2023, p. 50.




                                                                                                                                                      Page 3



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Water Secure Haryana Program(P512898)


Welfare (DAFW), and nine other agencies, HWRA launched the Integrated Water Resources Action Plan (IWRAP) 2023–
25, later updated for 2025–27. District Water Resources Plans were prepared by 22 District Committees, based on block-
level analysis under HWRA guidance.
11.      The IWRAP provides a critical platform for advancing IWRM in Haryana by translating technical diagnostics into
coordinated action. It prioritizes investments in high-stress areas, tackling waterlogging and low efficiency.
Implementation has already covered 79,000 ha with drainage, canal rehabilitation, recharge structures, pond
rejuvenation, wastewater reuse, micro-irrigation, and climate-resilient practices such as direct seeded rice, crop
diversification, and stress-tolerant varieties. A state-district monitoring framework tracks performance. By integrating
infrastructure improvement, agronomic change, and institutional coordination with a results-based monitoring
framework, IWRAP establishes the operational foundations for scaling integrated, data-driven, and district-focused water
resources planning into a more comprehensive IWRM phase for Haryana.
 Relationship to CAS/CPF

12.     The Program is aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY18–22, approved
by the Board in 2018 (Report 126667-IN), extended through FY25. The Program aligns with the World Bank’s mission of
ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity on a livable planet, as well as the India Systematic Country
Diagnostic,12 which highlights water stress as a key development challenge. By improving irrigation service delivery,
expanding the reuse of treated wastewater, promoting climate-resilient and water-efficient agriculture, and strengthening
water institutions, the Program aligns with Focus Area 1 of the CPF on Resource-Efficient Growth. The Program’s
integrated approach – combining institutional reforms, infrastructure modernization, and climate-adaptive agricultural
practices – reflects the CPF’s cross-cutting priorities of climate-resilient engagement and harnessing high-impact
technologies to improve service delivery and build resilience. It also aligns with India’s evolving development priorities,
especially the focus on rural prosperity, resilience, and climate adaptation. Finally, the Program is consistent with India’s
Long-Term Low Carbon Development Strategy13 and Nationally Intended Determined Contributions,14 which recognize
water as climate-vulnerable and emphasize adaptation through efficient water use.
  Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument

13.      The World Bank can leverage global experience, technical expertise, and reform-oriented financing to Haryana’s
water and agriculture sectors. The engagement will build on the state’s IWRAP, through integrated reforms across
institutions, infrastructure, and agriculture to address water stress and improve service delivery. Drawing on lessons from
global experience and national operations, the World Bank will support the state in adopting best practices in irrigation
and drainage modernization, treated wastewater reuse, climate-resilient agriculture, and participatory water governance.
The Program will strengthen monitoring, evaluation, and accountability systems, facilitate the design and rollout of digital
tools, promote climate-adaptive strategies, and support the evolution of IWRAP from short-term planning cycles toward
a long-term IWRM approach essential to water security.
14.      The Program for Results (PforR) instrument is well-aligned with Haryana’s results-driven approach to
institutional reform, irrigation and drainage modernization, and climate-resilient service delivery – advancing an
integrated approach to efficient water management. The PforR allows the World Bank to support an existing government
program while incentivizing outcomes that reflect improved capacity, equity, and sustainability in irrigation, drainage, and

12 World Bank Group, 2018, India Systematic Country Diagnostic: Realizing the Promise of Prosperity, Washington, DC: World Bank,

https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29879.
13 Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 2022, India’s long-term low-carbon development strategy, Government of India.
14 Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, India’s intended Nationally Determined Contributions – Towards Climate Justice,

https://moef.gov.in/uploads/2018/04/revised-PPT-Press-Conference-INDC-v5.pdf.


                                                                                                                                                 Page 4



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Water Secure Haryana Program(P512898)


agriculture. By introducing evidence-based performance incentives, the Program will reward improvements in water use
efficiency and water resources management, contributing to a water-secure Haryana. It will strengthen IWRM policy
frameworks, embed real-time intelligence in monitoring, modernize irrigation and drainage services, and improve on-farm
water productivity, thereby accelerating the shift from building infrastructure to delivering measurable performance in
climate-resilient water management. This instrument will help the government take a strategic and systematic approach
to addressing water overuse and stress, and is especially suited to Haryana’s context, where political commitment, good
institutional capacity, and clarity of objectives create favorable conditions for measurable development impact.
 C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

 Program Development Objective(s)
15.    The proposed PDO is to strengthen water resources management and agricultural services for efficient and
improved water use in Haryana.
 PDO Level Results Indicators

16.       The proposed PDO indicators for the Program are as follows:

      •   People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (number)
      •   Area benefiting from improved irrigation and drainage services (hectares)
             o New farm area equipped with high efficiency irrigation (drip/sprinkler/pressurized) and supported by
                  user-managed O&M arrangements (hectares)
      •   Number of groundwater assessment blocks showing non-declining or improving groundwater level trends
          (number)
      •   Area under climate-resilient and improved crop management practices (hectares)
      •   Share of irrigation demand met through safely reused treated wastewater (percentage)

 D. Program Description

 PforR Program Boundary

17.      The proposed PforR Program will support a subset of GoH initiatives on integrated water resources
management, with a focus on irrigation, drainage, and agriculture. The GoH program, through the IWRAP, is focused on
formulating holistic solutions to Haryana's water crisis by working across government agencies through strategic
interventions and collaborative governance. It consolidates District Water Resources Plans at the block level through
District Water Resources Planning Committees and implements block-specific interventions to reduce the existing water
gap. Each action plan spans two fiscal years, with a new plan prepared and adopted before the conclusion of each cycle.
18.       The boundaries of the Program are defined as follows:
      •   Services. The Program will cover key services (both gravity and pressurized irrigation for agricultural water
          management) under the GoH program in an integrated manner.
      •   Institutions and state capability. The Program will support institutional reforms and capacity building within
          various water agencies, in particular IWRD and DAFW, enhancing their ability to deliver reliable, efficient, and
          equitable irrigation and drainage and agricultural services, including climate resilient agriculture and crop
          diversification. The Program will also develop the technical and financial capacity of Water User Associations
          (WUAs).

                                                                                                                      Page 5



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Water Secure Haryana Program(P512898)


      •   Duration. The Program will be implemented over a period of six years (2026-2032).
      •   Financing. The Program budget is US$715 million, with US$500 million from IBRD and US$215 million from GoH.
      •   Implementation responsibility. The Program will be coordinated by the IWRD, in close collaboration with the
          HWRA. Key implementing agencies include the Irrigation & Water Resources Department, the Micro-Irrigation &
          Command Area Development Authority (MICADA) under IWRD, the Department of Agriculture and Farmers’
          Welfare, and the Haryana Forest Department (HFD).
19.       The Program will support the GoH through the following five Result Areas:
      a. RA1: Strengthen Planning, Institutions and Finance for Sustainable Water Resources Management: This will
         focus on building institutional capacity for integrated, data-driven water resources management through adoption
         of an IWRM policy framework and basin planning, digital monitoring tools, participatory governance, and
         performance benchmarking, while also promoting participation of private sector providers in irrigation service
         delivery.
      b. RA2: Enhance Efficiency and Quality of Irrigation Services: This will focus on improving irrigation reliability,
         efficiency and equity by modernizing canals, deploying digital monitoring systems (SCADA, IoT, dashboards), and
         introducing Performance-Based Contracts with private providers, alongside asset performance benchmarking.
      c. RA3: Mobilize Non-conventional Water Resources for Irrigation: This will focus on expanding irrigation supply
         and enhancing drought resilience by harnessing monsoon surplus and drainage water, creating offline storage,
         and promoting the safe reuse of treated wastewater through compliant infrastructure, risk protocols, and
         monitoring systems.
      d. RA4: Expand Micro-Irrigation through Farmer-managed and Sustainable O&M: This will focus on empowering
         WUAs to manage irrigation O&M and scaling up farmer-led micro-irrigation through co-management models,
         vendor engagement, and private sector financing to improve efficiency and sustainability.
      e. RA5: Reduce Agricultural Water Demand: This will focus on promoting crop diversification, Direct Seeded Rice,
         stress-tolerant varieties, and climate-smart agronomic practices through demonstration farms and Water Schools,
         helping farmers improve water productivity, strengthen resilience, and adopt more sustainable land and crop
         management.
 E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening

20.      Benefits. The Program is expected to deliver positive environmental and social (E&S) impacts. Investments in
promoting water source protection and restoration, building natural aquifer recharge in drier semi-arid regions of the
state, treated wastewater reuse, improved drainage, and water storage infrastructure will help reduce groundwater over-
extraction, reclaim waterlogged and saline land, and better manage runoff, thereby enhancing water security and
resilience. These measures are expected to improve water quality, increase groundwater recharge, and promote healthier
ecosystems. Rural and urban users will get more reliable water supply for agriculture and drinking water (several irrigation
canals also supply raw drinking water to cities and towns) purposes supporting livelihoods and public health. Participatory
approaches and institutional strengthening will empower local communities, promote inclusive decision-making, and
improve transparency and accountability in water resource management. Overall, the Program aims to foster higher water
use efficiency and agricultural productivity, improved climate resilience in agriculture, better community health outcomes,
and more sustainable and equitable water management in Haryana.
21.     Risks and Impacts. As per preliminary screening, the Program is likely to cause Substantial E&S risks and impacts.
Potential environmental risks and impacts centering on modernizing canal systems, silt removal, occupational health and


                                                                                                                        Page 6



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Water Secure Haryana Program(P512898)


safety risk, such as accidents and exposure to hazardous materials, as well as potential pollution from noise, dust, and
improper waste disposal during construction are relevant. The Program could cause water source contamination if
systems are not properly managed. Program investments are not expected to involve land acquisition or involuntary
resettlement. However, construction for upgrading irrigation, drainage, and other water infrastructure could temporarily
impact people’s assets, crops/fields, and disrupt livelihoods especially for vulnerable groups. Other social risks could relate
to unfair labor practices and unsafe/unhygienic working conditions, and occupational health and safety risks during civil
construction. Community health and safety concerns, particularly from construction traffic, waste handling, and reuse of
treated water are relevant. Inadequate stakeholder engagement and community awareness could lead to the exclusion
of marginalized groups from planning and benefits. Additionally, the current institutional capacity to mitigate and manage
these E&S risks may hinder effective E&S management under the program.
22.      Environmental and Social Systems Assessment. The World Bank will conduct the Environmental and Social
Systems Assessment (ESSA) during the Program preparation phase. It will assess the adequacy of Haryana’s legal and
regulatory frameworks, the capacity of Program implementing agencies and their past performance in managing E&S risks,
including processes to adequately identify, mitigate, and manage potential E&S impacts identified in the Program. The
ESSA will specifically examine the institutional capacity on managing environmental risks associated with creating and
maintaining irrigation infrastructure, earthwork, health and safety issues, as well as social risks related to livelihood
impacts, exclusion of vulnerable groups, disparities in access to water and agricultural services, grievance redress
mechanisms, and citizen engagement platforms. Given that the Program aims to make Haryana a water-secure state, the
assessment will also explore opportunities of inter-departmental coordination for source protection and management in
select regions of the state. The ESSA will inform the design of the Program Action Plan (PAP), and Disbursement Linked
Indicators (DLIs), ensuring that the Program strengthens E&S systems while achieving its development objectives.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Satya Priya LNU
   Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

   Saumya Srivastava
   Agriculture Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  India

 Implementing Agencies
  Irrigation & Water Resources Department, Government of Haryana

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                                                                                                                          Page 7



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Water Secure Haryana Program(P512898)


The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                    Page 8



                                            Official Use Only
