Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 10/13/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04511




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 15, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P512407                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      SFDP                       2026

                     Operation Name            Sustainable Fisheries Development Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Viet Nam                  Viet Nam                                EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC      Environment, Natural
                                                                                                                  Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                  Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                     The Socialist Republic    Ministry of Agriculture and             25-Aug-2025                26-Feb-2026
                     of Viet Nam               Environment (MAE) , An Giang
                                               Provincial People's Committee (PPC),
                                               Can Tho City People's Committee,



Public Disclosure
                                               Thanh Hoa Provincial People's
                                               Committee (PPC), Ca Mau Provincial
                                               People's Committee (PPC)

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     08-Oct-2025               214,330,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Enhance the management of fisheries sector and increase value-added through upgrading with smart infrastructure.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Blue Economy has become an important engine of economic growth for Viet Nam, with its coastal provinces accounting
                     for close to 60 percent of the national GDP. Protecting marine resources is a core priority in the 2018 Strategy for

                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                  Page 2 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     Sustainable Development of Viet Nam’s Marine Economy by 2030 and the vision for 2045 (Marine Strategy). The Marine
                     Strategy further prioritizes ensuring prosperity, safety, and resilience for coastal communities, where a large portion of
                     the population resides. Improved fisheries governance, recovery of fish stock, and higher fish food quality are key
                     priorities. To achieve goals of protecting resources and safeguarding livelihoods of small-scale fishers, the adoption of
                     related fisheries legislation emphasizes co-management in nearshore fisheries. Broader sector development directions
                     include increasing aquaculture, decreasing capture, improving value-addition through investments in smart
                     infrastructure, and ensuring sustainability, including though the development of modern “Blue Ports”, and continued
                     fishing fleet rationalization. While resources and habitats are under co-management and showing improvement,
                     development disturbances and climate change are expected to further impact capture fisheries and aquaculture
                     substantially. The proposed Sustainable Fisheries Development work (SFDP) will support the Government of Viet Nam in
                     advancing the implementation of key aspects of the country's Fisheries Law and the Marine Strategy. More specifically,
                     by drawing on core fisheries sustainability pillars, the SFDP will support the newly-formed Ministry of Agriculture and
                     Environment (MAE) and selected provinces in strengthening fisheries governance systems and undertaking strategic
                     investments, particularly in climate-resilient smart infrastructure for protecting and improving production capacities and
                     supply chains, as well as for scaling-up adaptation in low-laying coastal areas through support for polyculture adoption.
                     The SFDP is further informed by the strategic development directions in the fisheries sector outlined in Viet Nam’s
                     Socio-Economic Development Strategy (SEDS) 2021-2030 and Plan (SEDP) 2021-2025, whereby marine aquaculture and
                     capture fisheries are recognized as priority sectors in the country’s economic development, providing significant
                     contribution to the economy. To this end, the SFDP will focus on assisting Viet Nam to meet priority needs in developing
                     modern “Blue Ports” and storm shelters to strengthen climate resilience, improve value addition, and strengthen port
                     state control to meet market access and traceability requirements for sustainable fisheries management. Targeted




Public Disclosure
                     infrastructure support to key fishing ports and vessel shelters under both central and provincial management is needed,
                     given their importance in fisheries governance particularly for port state control of capture fisheries. Aquaculture
                     support will further focus on strengthening coastal adaptation in conjunction with introducing poli-culture practices to
                     expand sustainable production of Viet Nam’s key export shrimp commodity. Enabling emerging high-value mariculture
                     commodities, such as crustaceans and mollusks will also be considered. The SFDP investments directed at protecting
                     marine fishery resources are expected to contribute, in the long run, to mitigating biodiversity loss and diminishing
                     ecosystem services while supporting livelihoods, food, and nutrition security, all of which are inherently linked and
                     contribute to the foundations of a livable Planet Earth. Thus, the SFDP will help Viet Nam to grow its marine economy
                     without depleting its natural capital and while benefiting multiple fishery communities. The investments under MAE
                     component involving the construction/upgrading of grade I and regional fishing ports and storm shelters include: (a)
                     wharves for vessels and logistic services, with lengths varying from 122 to 250 meters; port sections embankments of
                     hundreds of meters long; dredging of access channels and anchoring waters with areas ranging from a few to tens of
                     hectares; and dredged material volumes from a few thousand to tens of thousands of cubic meters. Except for the one
                     subproject on upgrading Tam Quan storm shelter, the excavated materials is about 500,000 m3; (b) technical
                     infrastructure, such as internal roads; electricity, water supply, drainage and wastewater treatment systems; signaling
                     and communication systems, etc.; and (c) logistic infrastructures including warehouses for fishery classification, storage,
                     and processing; operational houses, etc. The An Giang, Can Tho City, Thanh Hoa and Ca Mau provincial subprojects
                     encompass investments in upgrading aquaculture infrastructure and, for Thanh Hoa and Ca Mau, provincial fishery port
                     and storm shelter rehabilitation and upgrades. Specifically, for An Giang Province, these physical investments include:
                     23 sluices with widths ranging from 8-10 meters to serve rice and aquaculture farming; upgrading of transport roads to
                     nine meters wide with a total length of 7 km; construction of low voltage and medium power lines, and 30 small
                     transformer stations to operate the sluices. Support for An Giang also introduces and scales up innovative aquaculture


                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     practices in rice-shrimp and mangrove-shrimp/crab farming for resilient livelihoods. It includes training, linking the
                     private sector for aquaculture products, marketing, support for origin tracking, and certification to meet VietGAP, SRP,
                     and ASC standards, as well as GHG emission reduction measurement. For Can Tho City, these physical investments
                     include upgrading rural roads and bridges with a total length of about 73.7 km and widths of 7.5 meters; dredging
                     canals to provide better water supply and discharge, and to backfill the project rural roads along these canals. The total
                     length of dredged canals is about 305 km, with excavated materials amounting to 2.9 million cubic meters. It is noted
                     that although the total volume of Soc Trang investments is large, they are small-scale investments scattered across a
                     large rural area of four districts in Can Tho City. The dredged canals are intra-field, and analysis showed that the
                     dredged materials are non-contaminated. Support for Can Tho city also includes support to introduce and scale up
                     innovative aquaculture practices for resilient livelihoods, and support to ethnic minority communes for the construction
                     of family latrines to improve sanitation and the environment in aquaculture areas. For Thanh Hoa Province, physical
                     investments will support rehabilitation and upgrading of provincial ports and storm shelter, including: (a) wharves for
                     vessels and logistics services, with estimated combined length of 390 meters; port sections embankments; and dredging
                     of access channels; (b) technical infrastructure such as internal roads; electricity, water supply, drainage and
                     wastewater treatment systems; signaling and communication systems, etc.; and (c) logistics infrastructure including
                     warehouses for fishery classification, storage, and processing; operational houses, etc. Physical investments will also
                     include upgrading access roads with a total length of about 6 km, construction of culverts, strengthening embankments
                     and dredging canals to provide better water supply and discharge, and backfilling project rural roads along these canals.
                     The total length of dredged canals is about 14.2 km. The dredged canals are intra-field, and analysis has shown that the
                     dredged materials are non-contaminated. These investments will be spread across nine Thanh Hoa communes. Support
                     for Ca Mau Province involves rehabilitation and upgrading of one provincial port, including: (a) pier expansion to 150




Public Disclosure
                     meters; (b) dredging of access channels and anchoring waters, and (c) logistics infrastructure including warehouses for
                     fishery classification, storage, and processing; operational houses, etc.. Physical investments will also include upgrading
                     rural roads with a total length of about 76.7 km, strengthening embankments and dredging canals to provide better
                     water supply and discharge, and backfilling project rural roads along these canals. The total length of dredged canals is
                     about 14.8 km. The dredged canals are intra-field, and analysis has shown that the dredged materials are non-
                     contaminated. These investments will be spread across five Ca Mau communes. The project will further support
                     acquisition of two canoes and two small vessels as well as training and capacity-building programs, including for
                     technology adoption for sustainable fish harvesting and post-harvest loss reduction, strengthening domestic IUU fishing
                     management capacity, application of advanced technologies for fish product traceability, and the development of fish
                     farming certified bio-safety areas, value chain improvement, and brand development.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project will be implemented across seven coastal provinces in various ecological regions of Vietnam, spanning from
                     the North to the South. The proposed investments will be situated in existing or planned areas for provincial fishing
                     ports, storm shelters, and shrimp culture zones. Most of the subproject investments will primarily occur on the
                     mainland in modified habitats or areas already impacted by human activities, such as ports with associated industrial
                     infrastructure. The exception pertains to the investment in upgrading fishing port and storm shelter (one subproject
                     under MAE component), located on Bach Long Vy island, which is within the development area of the Bach Long Vy
                     protected marine area (MPA). The project sites are accessible via roads and/or waterways. The existing systems at the
                     fishing ports are generally poorly managed, including improper management of solid waste and the discharge of


                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     untreated wastewater into the environment. The project areas are all vulnerable to climate change and natural
                     disasters, albeit at varying levels.

                     Five provinces are selected to receive investments under MAE’s Component 1: Hai Phong, Thanh Hoa, Gia Lai, Khanh
                     Hoa, and An Giang. Additionally, Thanh Hoa, Can Tho, An Giang and Ca Mau have proposed their own separate
                     investments under Components 2, 3, 4 and 5. Hai Phong stands out as an industrial hub and the largest seaport in
                     Northern Vietnam. It serves as the economic, scientific, commercial, and technological center of the Northern Coastal
                     Region. Ranking as the third-largest city in Vietnam and the second largest in the North after Hanoi, Hai Phong is a
                     crucial sea transport node with a deep-water port that bolsters maritime transport and fuels the growth of the Northern
                     Key Economic Zone. Following its merger with Hai Duong province, Hai Phong has a population of 4.66 million and spans
                     a natural area of 3,194.72 km². Thanh Hoa locates in the North Central region of Central Vietnam, influenced by the
                     Northern key economic zone. Its 102 km coastline is ideal for developing tourism and seaport activities. The coastal strip
                     covers over 8,000 hectares of tidal flats, rich in resources for brackish water aquaculture, including giant tiger prawns,
                     mantis shrimp, crabs, and seaweed. Thanh Hoa's population stands at 3.8 million, making it the third most populous
                     province in the country. Gia Lai, which now includes the newly merged Binh Dinh, is situated in the South-Central Coast
                     of Central Vietnam and is the second largest province in the country. Gia Lai spans an area of 21,577 km², ranking
                     second in size, with a population of 3.6 million, ranking fifteenth. The province is home to more than 44 ethnic groups,
                     with ethnic minorities constituting about 46.26% of the population. Khanh Hoa, which now includes the newly merged
                     Ninh Thuan, covers an area of 8,555.86 km² and has a population of over 2.24 million. Located in the South-Central
                     Coast, Khanh Hoa boasts a 385 km long coastline and many famous islands and bays and is rich in marine resources.




Public Disclosure
                     After merging with Hau Giang and Soc Trang provinces, Can Tho City, a centrally governed city, covers an area of
                     approximately 6,360 km² with a population of over 4 million people. Situated at the heart of the Mekong Delta, Can Tho
                     city shares borders with An Giang, Dong Thap, Ca Mau, Vinh Long provinces, and the East Sea. The city is focusing on
                     developing sectors such as services, trade, tourism, logistics, the processing industry, high-tech agriculture, education
                     and training, and specialized healthcare. Meanwhile, the new An Giang province, after merging with Kien Giang, spans
                     an area of 9,889 km² and is home to 4.9 million people, making it the largest province in the Mekong Delta in terms of
                     both area and population. An Giang has a nearly 100 km long border with Cambodia, featuring several key border gates.
                     The province is prominent in agricultural production, particularly rice, seafood, and fruit trees. Additionally, An Giang
                     boasts significant tourism potential, especially in spiritual tourism, ecological tourism, and nature exploration. The
                     province is culturally rich, with diverse ethnic groups including Kinh, Khmer, Cham, and Hoa, each contributing to its
                     unique cultural heritage and traditional festivals. After the merging with Bac Lieu, Ca Mau province has a total natural
                     area of more than 7,942 km² and a population of over 2.6 million people. The new Ca Mau province, with a coastline of
                     310 km and a vast sea area of about 120,000 km2, is one of the largest “aquatic granaries” in the country.

                     Major ethnic groups include the Kinh majority, Khmer (in Ca Mau, Can Tho, and An Giang), and Muong, Thai, H’Mong (in
                     Thanh Hoa), along with urban Sino-Vietnamese ethnic Hoa (in An Giang, Can Tho). These Ethnic Minorities (EM),
                     particularly the Khmer, live intermixed with the Kinh. Their livelihoods, mostly reliant on agriculture, are increasingly
                     vulnerable to climate change. The Khmer also engage in fishery and aquaculture. The Khmer are self-identified as an EM
                     group among 54 ethnic group and nationally recognized. They have distinct customary cultural, economic, and social
                     institutions separate from the majority Kinh people, and they speak the Khmer language, which differs from the national
                     language (Tiếng Việt).



                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)




                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of Agriculture and Environment (MAE) and the City/Provincial People’s Committees (C/PPCs) act as the
                     executing agencies. The central Agricultural Project Management Board (APMB) under MAE, along with city/provincial
                     ODA Project Management Units (C/PPMUs), serve as the implementing agencies (IAs). The provinces covered under
                     MAE's managed component include Hai Phong (retaining its name after merging with Hai Duong), Thanh Hoa, Gia Lai
                     (newly named after merging with Binh Dinh), Khanh Hoa (maintaining its name after merging with Ninh Thuan), and An
                     Giang (newly named after merging with Kien Giang). Additionally, four separate participating cities/provinces manage
                     their own components are An Giang (newly named after merging with Kien Giang), Ca Mau (retaining its name after
                     merging with Bac Lieu), Can Tho city (newly named after merging with Bac Lieu and Soc Trang), and Thanh Hoa.

                     The MAE and City/PPCs oversee project implementation and manage related departments along with APMB and
                     C/PPMUs. They ensure compliance with government regulations and the WB’s Environmental and Social Framework
                     (ESF) requirements. Relevant departments under MAE and C/PPCs coordinate and conduct technical reviews, advising
                     decision-making. Within the structure of APMB and C/PPMUs, the E&S department, which includes designated
                     personnel for managing environmental and social risks and impacts, was already established alongside technical,
                     finance, and procurement teams.

                     The APMB and C/PPMUs have experience with WB-funded projects, and their staff are familiar with the WB's
                     safeguards requirements. However, they lack experience in preparing and implementing projects under the ESF,




Public Disclosure
                     necessitating training and capacity building. They need to understand the concept of proportionality and adaptive
                     management within the ESF, along with new requirements such as labor and working conditions, community health and
                     safety (CHS), occupational health and safety (OHS), modified natural habitats, and systematic stakeholder engagement.
                     Additionally, the responsibility for land acquisition and resettlement (LAR) implementation and grievance redress
                     mechanism (GRM) resolution primarily lies with commune/ward authorities, which often lack the capable staff to
                     address land-related requirements promptly. The Bank team anticipates a heightened demand for continuous hands-on
                     support in E&S risk management during preparation and implementation compared to previous safeguard policies. This
                     will require additional resources and staff time. The recent significant changes in the implementation arrangement due
                     to city/province mergers and the reorganization of the provincial PMUs mean that personnel responsible for E&S risk
                     management, including a GRM focal point, are required to be ready to provide effective oversight and support.

                     Proposed mitigation measures include the World Bank team providing ESF implementation training and comprehensive
                     capacity assessments during project preparation and implementation. Capacity building activities shall include the
                     recruitment of additional qualified staff, hands-on extended implementation support (HEIS), mobilization of supervision
                     and monitoring consultants.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                     Substantial




                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating is Substantial. The MAE investments involve the construction and upgrading of fishing
                     ports and storm shelters i.e.: (a) wharves; port embankments; dredging of access channels and anchorages; (b)
                     technical infrastructure, such as roads, electricity, water supply, drainage and wastewater treatments; signaling and
                     communication systems, etc.; (c) logistic facilities like warehouses for fishery sorting, storage, and processing; and
                     operations buildings. The provincial components will finance canal dredging, construction/upgrading of sluices for
                     saline-freshwater separation, rural roads and bridges; electricity system, and storm shelters. The investments will be
                     located in existing or planned areas for fishing ports, storm shelters, and shrimp culture zones, mostly on the
                     mainland in modified habitats or areas already affected by human activities. The project will not affect IUCN-listed
                     Endangered or Critically Endangered species, nor significantly impact critical or natural habitats. The project key risks
                     stem from physical investments i.e. construction or upgrading fishing ports and storm shelters, and infrastructures for
                     shrimp culture areas. Common construction related risks and impacts include dust, emissions, noise, vibration, waste
                     generation. Dredging and excavation activities could increase the likelihood of UXO findings. Construction activities
                     may generate dust, noise, and vibrations, as well as solid, hazardous, and liquid wastes that can pollute air, soil, and
                     water. Dredging and embankment construction may temporarily increase water turbidity, disturb sediments, cause
                     soil erosion, subsequently negatively affect aquatic flora and fauna. Dredging of port access channels and anchorage
                     under the MAE project will generate considerable volumes of excavated material, typically ranging from a few to
                     several tens of thousands, or even several hundred thousand cubic meters. The provincial canal dredging potentially
                     generate a few million cubic meters of spoil (e.g. Can Tho). Although the total volume is high, works are small-scale
                     and dispersed across large rural areas. Analyses indicate that the dredged materials are non-hazardous; however, if
                     not carefully managed, they could cause water and soil pollution at disposal sites. OHS and community risks during



Public Disclosure
                     construction include operating heavy machinery, working in water environment, traffic safety risks, and obstruction
                     from equipment occupying waterways. Part of some ports will remain operational during upgrades, posing additional
                     risks to nearby residents and port users. During operation, the SFDP may pose several key environmental risks and
                     impacts, including oil leaks leading to soil and water pollution from port activities; disturbance to aquatic life and
                     degradation of surface and coastal water quality due to maintenance dredging and concentrated vessel traffic;
                     occupational and community health and safety risks associated with port operations; health risks from excessive
                     chemical use in shrimp farming; land salinization and water pollution caused by saline shrimp farming practices; and
                     traffic-related risks and disturbances on roads and waterways stemming from increased transport and operational
                     activity. These impacts are long-term, reversible and mitigable. The project also provides TAs to strengthen fisheries
                     management and promote sustainable aquaculture through training, technology transfer, and data system
                     improvements. While these activities are not expected to cause direct E&S impacts, they may have downstream E&S
                     implications such as intensified aquaculture practices, increased use of production resources, and unequal access to
                     technologies. During TA design and implementation, relevant ESSs will be applied and appropriate mitigation
                     measures identified and integrated. IAs have limited knowledge and experience implementing projects applying the
                     ESF, necessitating targeted training and capacity building prior to implementation
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk is assessed Substantial considering project interventions, scope of impacts and locations and the
                     Borrower’s implementation capacity. The upgrading of the infrastructure will require land acquisition, and physical
                     relocation, as well as disruptions to livelihood opportunities. The project will permanently require a total of 320 ha of
                     various types of lands. It will adversely affect about 2,300 households (HHs) by loss of lands and/or assets on lands.
                     Among these, about 1,150 HHs will loss both land and assets on land, while the remaining 1,150 HHs (majorly in Ca

                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                     Mau) will be affected only by loss of assets (trees, fences,…). About 80 HHs may need to be relocated, under the MAE
                     (68) to newly developed resettlement site and An Giang (12) to existing residence sites. Of total 320 ha to be
                     acquired, approximately 5.8 ha of paddy land will adversely impact rice farmers who rely on rice cultivation for their
                     main source of livelihood. Those impacts, along with loss of land, will be adversely affected to Khmer ethnic group
                     present in the project area, whose livelihoods tend to be more precarious and sensitive to disruption. Approximately
                     210 Khmer HHs in An Giang, Ca Mau and Can Tho will be directly impacted by the loss of land. This negatively affects
                     these households by causing land acquisition, disruption, and altering their livelihood models. There is also a risk of
                     temporary disruptions on aquaculture/agriculture and fishing activities, and residential establishments, which could
                     temporarily affect people’s livelihoods and living conditions. A 4.5-hectare resettlement site will be developed in An
                     Giang province, primarily utilizing paddy land, and will be funded by the central budget under MAE's component.
                     There are concerns regarding the capacity of the APMB, which will be responsible for implementing the work,
                     considering their limitations of experience, human resources, and coordination with local agencies. Lessons from
                     previous WB-funded infrastructure projects have underscored the importance of adequate budgeting during the
                     project design phase, as well as the timely allocation of funds for land acquisition and resettlement (LAR) to prevent
                     delays in project implementation. The government and implementing agencies have capacity limitations regarding
                     the LAR implementation, budgeting and LAR complaint resolution as observed from current project implementation
                     practices. Such potential risks and impacts require appropriate mitigation plans and discussions from the beginning of
                     the project to develop and effectively implement at a later stage of project preparation and implementation. The
                     project counterparts will also need to familiarize with the new ESF requirements (especially labor and working
                     conditions, non-discrimination, community health and safety, cultural heritage, and stakeholder engagement). In
                     addition, the responsibility for LAR lies majorly with commune administrative units, who often have to clear land for




Public Disclosure
                     multiple projects within a tight timeframe, which sometimes result in the slow implementation of resettlement plans.
                     Given that alternative designs have been considered during the feasibility study to minimize land acquisition and
                     adverse impacts on livelihoods, the social risks and impacts are assessed as mostly temporary, reversible, and
                     manageable. Mitigation and compensation measures are planned and feasible. Concerns about stakeholder
                     engagement can be addressed through implementation support. Mitigation measures, such as construction within
                     existing footprints, compensation at replacement cost, support for livelihood restoration, and relocation to
                     resettlement sites, will be implemented to offset the project's negative impacts.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      Five sets of draft E&S documents have been developed for five project components under the SFDP: the MAE project
                      and the four provincial projects in Thanh Hoa, Ca Mau, An Giang and Can Tho: Environmental and Social Impact
                      Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP); Resettlement Plan (RP); Labor
                      Management Procedures (LMP); Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEP); Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
                      (ESCP), and Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP). The documents are in line with the Bank’s ESF and national
                      regulations. With the exception of the ESIAs for the Thanh Hoa and Ca Mau components, the E&S documents have
                      been reviewed, found acceptable to the Bank, and disclosed by the Clients. The ESIAs for Thanh Hoa and Ca Mau are
                      underway and will be finalized prior to negotiations. The ESIAs/ESMPs for the MAE, An Giang, and Can Tho


                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                      components identify potential E&S risks and impacts, and the ESMPs include mitigation and management measures
                      to address them. The ESMPs include provisions for UXO surveys and clearance at required sites, to be completed
                      before any construction begins. The project ESMPs include measures to ensure that potential E&S risks and impacts
                      are addressed during detailed design, including stakeholder consultations, safe dredging practices, resilient
                      infrastructure design, compliance with wastewater treatment standards, operational readiness, and tailored
                      measures for sensitive areas such as Bach Long Vi. In addition, the ESMPs include: the ESCOPs to address common
                      construction-related impacts and risks (e.g., dust, emissions, noise, vibration, waste generation, OHS and CHS risks);
                      site-specific measures for the construction phase; and measures to manage operation-phase impacts. Dredged
                      Material Management Plans (DMMPs) have been prepared and incorporated into the ESMPs to guide dredging
                      activities and to specify measures to mitigate impacts on aquatic life, water quality, and aquaculture, and to prevent
                      pollution at disposal sites. To manage traffic safety risks, the ESMPs include traffic management plans for both
                      construction and operation, including coordination with local authorities, temporary signage and routing during
                      construction, and operational measures such as certified training for vessel operators, structured waterway
                      schedules, and deployment of traffic controllers during peak hours. CHS and OHS risks will be managed through the
                      project’s E&S management system, with measures set out in the ESCOP and site-specific actions and instruments
                      (e.g., Traffic Management Plan, Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan), which will be incorporated into
                      contractual documents and monitored throughout implementation. A grievance redress mechanism has been
                      developed to provide guidance on the reception, recording, handling, and reporting of complaints that may arise
                      during project implementation, in accordance with World Bank standards and the complaints law.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      The project’s key stakeholders include national, provincial, and local agencies responsible for developing fishery
                      infrastructure, enhancing institutional and sectoral capacity, and adding value to seafood products. These
                      stakeholders comprise the Agriculture Project Management Board (APMB) and city/provincial Project Management
                      Units (C/PPMUs); all-level authorities (ministries, city/provincial PCs, and ward/commune PCs); the agency
                      responsible for monitoring and managing agriculture/fisheries and the environment (DAE); the agency responsible for
                      planning, design, and construction management (DOC); and the Water Supply and Drainage Companies (wastewater
                      and drainage, water supply). Additionally, other interested parties include research institutes/academies,
                      local/international NGOs, and development partners (FAO) working in the area, mass organizations such as the
                      Fatherland Front, the Women’s Union, and the Farmer’s Union, as well as the private sector. Consultants and
                      contractors are also key stakeholders. The stakeholder engagement planning process should ensure transparency and
                      meaningful consultations with the affected and interested parties throughout the project cycle. The Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP) has been developed to ensure transparency and meaningful consultation with affected and
                      interested parties throughout the project cycle. The SEP takes into account inputs for E&S assessment, project design,
                      mitigation plans, monitoring reports, and further evaluation of the project. The SEP, along with other social and
                      environmental instruments, will be publicly disclosed as required by ESS10 and will be updated regularly during
                      project implementation. A project-wide Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be maintained, coordinating with
                      localized grievance redress processes to ensure that concerns are effectively captured and addressed by the APMB
                      and C/PPMUs. This mechanism will build on existing systems, such as the one-stop shops at the ward/commune and
                      grassroots levels, as well as the people’s courts, which are effective in resolving issues like land boundary disputes
                      and construction-related EHS impacts. The project GRM will build on, and coordinate, these mechanisms to ensure
                      that concerns are captured and addressed in a satisfactorily and timely manner. Throughout the E&S planning stage


                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                     Page 9 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                      from January 2024 to July 2025, various consultations and stakeholder engagement activities were carried out in the
                      project areas with the affected people and communities and other key stakeholders. Feedback and concerns from the
                      consultations were incorporated into the project design and draft versions of the ESIA, RP, EMDP, SEP, LMP, and
                      ESCP. Except the ESIA for Ca Mau, these instruments were already disclosed in-country at the Client's websites prior
                      to project appraisal to inform stakeholders about the project activities, the potential E&S risks and impacts, and
                      mitigation measures. The disclosure through the Bank's operations systems was also completed prior to project
                      appraisal. The final instruments will be disclosed locally in accessible places to project-affected parties and other
                      interested parties as set out in ESS10.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      The project will mobilize direct workers (APMB and PPMUs’ staff and consultants), contracted workers (about 250-
                      300 skilled and nonskilled construction workers per subproject), and primary supply workers (for essential
                      construction materials as defined in ESS2). Community workers are not expected. Viet Nam has a comprehensive
                      labor and working conditions framework, including the Labor Law (2019), the Law on Occupational Health and
                      Sanitation (2015), the Social Security Law (2014), and the Civil Servant Law (2019). Viet Nam ratified the Right to
                      Organize and Collective Bargaining Convention, effective July 2020. These laws align with ESS2 principles on fair
                      treatment, non- discrimination, equal opportunities, workers’ rights, prohibition of sexual exploitation, forced labor,
                      child labor, and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks. As a government entity, the APMB and C/PPMUs follow
                      these laws, with trade unions and grievance mechanisms in place, minimizing ESS2 risks for direct project workers.
                      OHS risks during construction and upgrading of port, storm shelter, embankment, sluice, road, and dredging works
                      include dust, noise, water pollution, chemical exposure, road and waterway traffic hazards, and risks of falling into



Public Disclosure
                      water and drowning. OHS mitigation measures and plans have been incorporated into the ESMPs. They align with
                      national laws, the World Bank Group EHS Guidelines, and good international industry practice; ensure contractors are
                      properly trained and equipped; and allocate sufficient budget for implementation. The Labor Management
                      Procedures (LMP) has been prepared that will apply to all project workers. The LMP will further ensure that the
                      health and safety of workers, especially women, are given adequate attention and equal opportunities. It will also
                      have the details of the grievance mechanism (GM) for workers and the roles and responsibilities for monitoring such
                      workers. During project implementation, the LMP will be revisited and updated as required and as additional labor-
                      related risks or issues unfold. Likewise, a Workers Code of Conduct, which contains the obligations of all workers
                      involved in the project, will be prepared and adherence to the Code of Conduct will be a condition of employment for
                      all workers. The LMP, GM and the Code of Conduct will be part of the bidding documents for construction.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      The project’s dredging and construction activities may temporarily affect air quality, land, and water bodies, resulting
                      in short-term environmental impacts. Dredging of port access channels and anchorage under the MAE project will
                      generate considerable volumes of excavated material, typically ranging from a few to several tens of thousands, or
                      even several hundred thousand cubic meters at a single subproject site. The canal dredging generate up to a few
                      milliion cubic meters in provincial components (e.g. Can Tho). Although the total volume is high, the works are of
                      medium or small scale and are dispersed across extensive rural areas. Dredging and embankment works can
                      temporarily increase turbidity, disturb sediments, and cause soil erosion, potentially affecting aquatic ecosystems and
                      nearby aquaculture. These effects typically result from sediment resuspension and the mobilization of adsorbed
                      contaminants.. The testing indicates that dredged materials from port and canals in shrimp-farming areas sare non-


                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                      hazardous with concentrations of hazardous substances, including heavy metals below regulatory thresholds.
                      However, the materials from ports and canals in shrimp-farming areas may have elevated organic content or be
                      naturally influenced by acid sulfate soils and salinity. Consequently, improper handling or disposal can still cause
                      water and soil pollution at disposal sites—particularly through salinity-driven soil degradation and acidification of
                      soils and runoff. These impacts are temporary, reversible, and can be mitigated through design and management
                      practices, such as constructing embankments around disposal areas to prevent overflow during the rainy season,
                      covering the material to limit exposure to air, and establishing sedimentation ponds to collect and reduce turbidity
                      and neutralize the pH of leachate. The dredged materials will be disposed of on designated sites suchs as unsed
                      farming ponds and abondoned rice field approved by local authorities, or used as backfill for rural roads adjacent to
                      dredged canals in aquaculture areas. To mitigate dredging-related impacts, the ESMPs include Dredged Material
                      Management Plans (DMMP) that set out measures and detailed requirements for contractors to prepare and
                      implement a contractor’s DMMP (C-DMMP). The guiding DMMP detailing requirements on dredging volumes,
                      sediment characteristics (including sampling and testing), dredging methods and timing, transport & disposal
                      arrangements, pollution prevention, and site-specific risk controls. Measures include stakeholder consultations and
                      advance notification; avoidance of dredging during adverse weather and hydrometeorological conditions or
                      aquaculture-sensitive periods; installation of waterway safety signage & traffic controls, employing certified
                      equipment operators and providing PPE. Dredged material disposal sites will have containment, drainage, and
                      leachate treatment, supported by regular supervision, incident response, and record-keeping. Construction and
                      operation of port and other investments under project may generate dust, noise, vibrations, and various wastes that
                      can affect air, soil, and water quality. The ESMPs include pollution prevention measures aligned with Vietnamese
                      regulations and GIIP, covering air/dust, noise/vibration, wastewater, solid and hazardous waste, excessive use of




Public Disclosure
                      chemicals and biotic agents in shrimp farming, and oil leak incidents. Contractors will use compliant equipment, treat
                      wastewater before discharge, and implement dust controls such as water spraying and speed limits. Effective waste
                      management include segregation, secure storage, and handling by licensed units, and promote the principles of
                      reduce, reuse, and recycle throughout all stages of waste handling and disposal. Ports will maintain clean paved
                      roads, use sealed containers for aquatic products, and operate closed-system WWTPs with odor control technologies
                      meeting national standards. Oil spill containment equipment will be deployed, and trained staff will respond
                      promptly to any incidents. Green buffers, ventilation systems, and routine monitoring will support environmental
                      compliance and community protection. The project is expected to consume substantial raw materials for
                      construction, necessitating careful consideration to ensure resource efficiency. SFDP promotes resource efficiency
                      through careful design and planning of subprojects. Measures include minimizing vegetation clearance, optimizing
                      dredging schedules and techniques through stakeholder consultations, and selecting durable, locally appropriate
                      materials for embankments and port infrastructure. The project promotes the use of locally sourced construction
                      materials and ensures efficient water use. Port designs will incorporate energy-efficient lighting systems,
                      administrative buildings that maximize natural lighting, and landscaping with green buffers and irrigated green spaces
                      to improve the microclimate and reduce heat. Port infrastructure will use climate-resilient materials and construction
                      techniques to withstand salinity, storm surges, and erosion, contributing to long-term durability and reduced
                      maintenance needs. These features will ensure safe access for communities, continued use of water resources, and
                      long-term sustainability. Wastewater collection and drainage systems will be integrated into port facilities to reduce
                      environmental impact and support climate resilience by minimizing contamination risk during extreme weather and
                      promoting sustainable water management.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                           Relevant


                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                  Page 11 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                      Community health and safety risks and impacts are likely from construction noise, vibration, air pollution,
                      inappropriate management of construction waste and dredging materials, movement of heavy vehicles and plant in
                      congested and other restricted areas, worker influx into small communities. In addition, there is also risk related to
                      UXO left from the war which ended in 1975. Mitigation measures to prevent impacts and risks to CHS have been
                      included in the ESMPs for each Project component. The Borrower will implement the E&S management plans and
                      measures including UXO screening and removal, construction site management, traffic management, waste
                      management. To manage social impacts, activities include mapping service providers, assessing SEA/SH risks, and
                      establishing procedures for risk assessment and mitigation. Mitigation measures related to project workers are
                      incorporated within the labor management procedures. GBV, SEA/SH risks will be monitored throughout the project.
                      Climate resilient will be design into port and storm shelters to ensure risks are mitigated.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                 Relevant

                      The project will permanently require a total of 320 ha of various types of lands, including agricultural, residential,
                      garden, aquaculture, and public lands. It will adversely affect about 2,300 HHs by loss of lands and/or assets on lands.
                      Among these, about 1,150 households will loss both land and assets on land, while the remaining 1,150 HHs will be
                      affected only by loss of assets (trees, fences,…). There are 80 HHs that will need to be relocated to serviced
                      resettlement sites under the MAE (68) and An Giang (12) components. Of total 320 ha to be required, 5.8 ha of paddy
                      land will have a marginal impact on double-crop rice farmers. Other affected lands include residential, garden,
                      aquaculture, and public lands. Under MAE’s component, which focuses on sustainable infrastructure development by
                      updating fisheries ports/storm shelters and essential facilities, 165 hectares of agricultural land (6.2%), residential
                      land (1%), public land (87%), and unused land (5.8%) will be taken. The construction of Tam Quan storm shelter (Gia



Public Disclosure
                      Lai) will require 109 hectares (66%) mainly from river and stream land, while the fisheries hub in An Giang will need
                      clearance of 1.7 ha of residential area within Nga Bac village. This component will affect a total of 130 HHs, of which
                      68 HHs will need to be relocated for construction of the An Giang fisheries hub. Component for An Giang focuses on
                      investment in essential infrastructure in aquaculture areas (access roads, sluices, power lines) and community
                      livelihood transformation, which requires 15.5 ha, including 13 ha of state-managed land (roads, canal banks, and
                      water surface land) and 2.8 ha of private land. A total of 61 HHs, including 16 ethnic minority HHs, will be affected by
                      the acquisition of land. Can Tho component will also invest in fisheries infrastructure (access roads, water supply
                      systems) and strengthen management and technological capacity for sustainable fisheries development. It requires
                      35 ha of land from 488 HHs. Component for Thanh Hoa will invest in upgrading the fishing port and aquaculture
                      infrastructure. This component requires 12 ha of land, affecting about 210 ha. Similarly, Ca Mau component will
                      invest in upgrading fishing ports and access roads for aquaculture infrastructure. The component will acquire 88 ha of
                      land from 1,400 HHs. Among these, 1,150 HHs will be affected only by loss of assets (trees, fences,…). The impacts on
                      land and livelihoods from the infrastructure upgrades and road improvements are expected to be marginal, primarily
                      confined to the premises of the infrastructure and/or utilizing public and/or unused lands. A resettlement site (RS)
                      will be constructed under the MEA component in Nga Bac village, Tay Yen commune (An Giang) located 500 meters
                      from the project site, to accommodate 68 HHs. The development of the RS will occupy 4.5 hectares of agricultural
                      (paddy) land from 12 HHs. Approximately 152 plots (150 m²/plot) will be made available, including 30 spare plots for
                      contingency, to relocate the 68 physically resettled HHs (of which 54 HHs are eligible for two plots and 14 HHs for one
                      plot). The average residential plot size is about 250 square meters per household. Around 2.3 ha are set aside for
                      these housing plots, while the remaining 2.2 ha are reserved for internal roads, water supply, drainage systems,
                      public facilities—including a kindergarten, clinic, and cultural house—and additional spare plots. Extensive


                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                      consultations have been conducted with the households slated for relocation to discuss the resettlement site layout,
                      site readiness, plot sizes, and timelines, ensuring their feedback is incorporated into the final design. With this
                      arrangement, the proposed RS is expected to cover the resettlement needs. The counterpart financing for RS
                      development (including compensation and civil works) has been budgeted in the MAE’s decision on approval of
                      investment policy. A detailed implementation plan has been prepared and embedded to the Project Implementation
                      Plan (PIP), outlining the required actions, timeframes, and budget allocation (front-loading activities to be carried out
                      for LAR implementation, and UXO clearance) to ensure the RS is developed and available in advance of LAR
                      implementation for component’s investment. About 12 HHs for the An Giang component will move to the Binh Giang
                      1 residential area, which is completed and ready for use. It is anticipated that during the construction phase,
                      temporary restrictions on access to aquaculture, fishing activities, and residential areas could disrupt the livelihoods
                      and living conditions of local communities, including fishing villages. Measures to improve fisheries management may
                      also limit access. To address the impacts of LAR, detailed mitigation measures are being developed through an
                      intensive resettlement planning process. Efforts have been made to avoid or minimize potential land acquisition or
                      involuntary resettlement during the design phase by using environmental and social screening tools in conjunction
                      with early stakeholder engagement activities. The Resettlement Plan (RP) has been prepared to ensure that the
                      mitigation measures are adequate to restore the living conditions of those affected and includes a functioning
                      Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for resettlement-related complaints. The final number of affected people will
                      be determined once the detailed measurement survey (DMS) is completed, and compensation packages for Project-
                      Affected Households (PAHs) will be reviewed to ensure alignment with ESS5. The potential impacts on land prices and
                      construction will be assessed further during project implementation. Vietnam’s recent administrative reorganization
                      aims to boost decentralization by giving more power and resources to the commune level. Despite challenges in




Public Disclosure
                      implementing LAR, the WB Task Team will collaborate closely with the APMB and C/PPMUs and relevant authorities
                      to ensure the resettlement planning process is timely and adequately funded, as outlined in the Medium-Term
                      Investment Plan (MTIP) 2026-2030 for the MAE and the city/provinces. The E&S team will coordinate with the Task
                      Team and clients to develop a tailored implementation plan included in the Project Implementation Plan (PIP), which
                      will be updated through the Annual Work Plan. This plan will ensure all activities are completed before project
                      closure and will feature comprehensive consultations during project design and resettlement execution, as well as
                      capacity-building initiatives for APMB and C/PPMUs and key stakeholders to ensure efficient performance and
                      oversight of LAR activities aligned with procurement and construction progress.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      Project activities on existing canals and rivers may impact aquatic life, but are mostly situated in areas designated for
                      fishing ports and shrimp culture, not within critical habitats or high biodiversity areas. One exception is an MAE
                      subproject to upgrade the storm shelter in Bach Long Vy island. The subproject investments and the 03 disposal sites
                      are located within the development zone of the Bach Long Vy MPA. Although, these activities are distant from the
                      MPA strictly protected zones and are therefore not expected to impact MPA critical habitats, two of the three
                      disposal sites are situated approximately 50-100m from the MPA restoration area. The dredging and disposal of
                      excavated material could impact biodiversity and aquatic ecosystem, including the coral reef in the MPA's foreshore
                      in the restoration area, if it is not carefully managed. The MAE ESIA assesses biodiversity in the project area, and the
                      ESMP includes effective proportionate measures. Of the three disposal sites, sites 02 and 03 are located on elevated,
                      non-tidal land within the development zone and are expected to have a negligible impact on conservation. The


                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                      Page 13 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                      disposal site 01 (4.0 ha) – which includes an intertidal portion (~0.8 ha) and will be only used when others are full -
                      presents a risk of storm- or tide-driven inundation that could mobilize coarse, low-contaminant dredged materials
                      toward the restoration zone, causing localized smothering and turbidity. This risk will be mitigated by engineered
                      containment (rock-gabion walls, elevated crests), operational controls (e.g., no disposal during high tides or rough
                      seas), and monitoring. During operation, unmanaged vessel activities and accidental spills could affect MPA habitats;
                      however mitigation measures embedded in the ESMP/DMMP —including prioritizing the use of disposal sites 02 and
                      03, strict controls at disposal site 01, enforcement of no anchoring/fishing/discharge near the MPA, route planning,
                      spill preparedness, and coordination with the MPA Management Board—are expected to keep impacts localized and
                      largely reversible. Overall, the significance of impacts on the MPA is assessed as moderate during construction and
                      during disposal under adverse sea states, and low to moderate during operation, with residual impacts expected to
                      be low to moderate with effective implementation and enforcement. The upgrading of Lach Hoi Port under MAE will
                      require clearing approximately 0.15 ha of black mangrove shrubs along the Ma River within the project footprint.
                      These trees are dispersed along the riverbank and not an actual forest or a consolidated clump of trees. Furthermore,
                      they are not considered ecological significant beyond their role insoil stabilization. Their removal will eliminate
                      existing green cover within the port area and may increase site-specific risks of shoreline erosion and sedimentation
                      until engineered bank protection (pile-supported quay and reinforced concrete revetments) is in place. The impact is
                      assessed as moderate, given the limited scale and the planned replacement of the natural landscape with modern
                      port infrastructure, reinforced embankments, and landscaped areas within the completed facility. The project site will
                      be reinforced with embankments and harbor structures, including piles, to prevent erosion and landslides and will
                      enhance protection. The MAE ESMP includes specific measures to address vegetation loss impacts, including
                      preparing and implementing a vegetation-clearing plan that ensures safe continuity of existing port operations,




Public Disclosure
                      restricting clearing strictly to the necessary construction footprint, and marking and protecting mangrove clusters
                      that can feasibly be retained.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      While the project aims to bring positive changes on livelihoods to local communities, including ethnic minorities
                      (EMs), by improving access to sustainable aquaculture technologies and enhancing coastal resource management,
                      about 210 Khmer HHs in An Giang, Ca Mau and Can Tho will be negatively impacted, including land taking, access
                      restriction, and changes in livelihood models. In An Giang, construction of the sluices and the road will permanently
                      acquire land of approximately 16 Khmer households, who are participating in rice cultivation, small-scale business,
                      and aquaculture in the areas where they reside. In Ca Mau, the upgrading of embankments will need acquisition of
                      land from 46 Khmer households. The impacts on EM households may result in the permanent disruption of their
                      existing sources of livelihood, temporary disruption of commercial activities and rice cultivation during construction.
                      In Can Tho, the project interventions will temporarily affect coastal fishing activities (difficult reaching to the fishing
                      areas due to having to travel farther to offshore during construction) and coastal aquaculture of approximately 170
                      Khmer households. The Khmer EM presents in the project areas meets three criteria (a), (c) and (d) as outlined in the
                      ESS7, hence the ESS7 is relevant. The Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) has been prepared using Free, Prior,
                      and Informed Consent (FPIC) process. This ensures that these communities are adequately informed about the
                      project and its potential impacts and have the opportunity to freely give or withhold their consent. The FPIC involves
                      engaging with EMs to discuss the project, providing comprehensive information, and seeking collective support
                      through culturally appropriate means. The EMDP incorporates all the outcomes gathered during the FPIC process.


                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                        Page 14 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)



                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                     Relevant

                      The project is not expected to adversely affect tangible or intangible cultural heritage. However, the An Giang
                      subproject under the MAE component will require the relocation of dozens of graves, which will be planned and
                      implemented with sensitivity and care. This activity will be managed under ESS5 through the development of a Grave
                      Relocation Plan embedded in the resettlement plan. While no tangible cultural sites are affected by land acquisition,
                      some may experience temporary, moderate construction-related impacts and risks, including increased dust, noise
                      and vibration, temporary waste storage nearby, and restricted access. The ESMP includes measures to mitigate these
                      impacts, such as dust, noise, and waste controls; managed access and traffic with signage and safe passage to cultural
                      sites during festivals; and site reinstatement and cleaning, with landscape restoration where the surroundings are
                      affected. The ESMPs also include a chance find procedure to manage any instance where tangible cultural heritage is
                      discovered.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                Not Currently Relevant

                      The standard is not relevant, as the project does not involve any financial intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                      Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                No



Public Disclosure
                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           No
                       Viet Nam has been advancing its E&S Framework, there are however gaps between the environmental and social
                       assessment regulation and practice, especially in description of the environment, level of impact analysis and
                       mitigation measures, and public consultation and disclosure of information. There is no experience of implementing
                       agencies in implementing and applying ESF and associated environmental and social standards. The project therefore
                       will apply to the World Bank ESF and does not use the Borrower’s E&S Framework.



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                              No
                       No

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The Borrower shall publicly disclose the draft and final ESIAs, ESCPs, SEPs, RPs, EMDPs, and LMPs in a form and
                     language appropriate to stakeholders to meaningfully reflect feedback into project design and for appropriate adaptive
                     mitigation measures.


                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)




                     One month after the Effective Date, the Borrower is expected to complete:
                     (1)    Final Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) including Environmental and Social Management Plan
                     (ESMP)
                     (2)    Final Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     (3)    Final Resettlement Plan (RP)
                     (4)    Final Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     (5)    Final Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP), and
                     (6)    Final Labor Management Procedures (LMP)


                     Areas to be addressed in the ESCPs:
                     (1)     Commitment to prepare and implement the E&S instruments as per the requirements of relevant
                     Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs), i.e., ESIA, ESCP, SEP, RP, EMDP, and LMP
                     (2)     Adequate allocation of resources for implementation of the ESF, ESSs and E&S instruments
                     (3)     Commitment to prepare and implement a capacity building plan with strong focus on implementation of ESF,
                     ESSs and E&S instruments
                     (4)     Update Resettlement Plans, based on DMS and RCS results, and establish and maintain grievance redress
                     mechanism
                     (5)     Establish a Project Level Grievance Redress Mechanism




Public Disclosure
                     The timeframe for the preparation/finalization of these instruments during implementation are specified in the ESCP.
                     The timeframe for RPs will ensure that RPs' actions are implemented prior to the commencement of physical works. A
                     robust monitoring system will be required to set up and included in the project ESMP.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Milen F. Dyoulgerov Vollen              Title:       Senior Environmental Specialist

                      Email:                 mdyoulgerov@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Thu Thi Le Nguyen                       Job Title:   Senior Environmental Specialist

                      Email:                 nlethu@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Phuong Hoang Ai Nguyen                  Job Title:   Senior Environmental Specialist

                      Email:                 pnguyen5@worldbank.org




                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                                Page 16 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P512407)




                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                 Milen F. Dyoulgerov Vollen, Thu Thi Le Nguyen, Phuong Hoang Ai Nguyen

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:        Thuy Cam Duong

                     ADM Social Specialist:               Thong Trung Le




Public Disclosure




                    Oct 15, 2025                                                                                              Page 17 of 17
