Public Disclosure Authorized




                                INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT
                                                         FOR




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                    PROPOSED LOAN IN THE AMOUNT OF US$500 MILLION


                                                       FOR THE

                                 WATER SECURE HARYANA PROGRAM (P512898)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Draft



                                                    March 6, 2026




                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                                                                           ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



                                                           TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary...................................................................................................................... v
1. Introduction ......................................................................................................................... 1
    1.1 Background and Context ....................................................................................................... 1
    1.2 Program Design and Components .......................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
    1.3 Government Program and Bank-Financed Program (P versus p) ......................................... 4
    1.4 Program Implementing Agencies ............................................ Error! Bookmark not defined.
    1.5 Environmental and Social Systems Assessment ..................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
    1.6 Methodology ......................................................................................................................... 7
2. Assessment of Environmental and Social Effects .................................................................... 8
    2.1 Environmental and Social Overview ..................................................................................... 8
    2.2 Environmental and Social Risks and Benefits ......................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
    2.3 Environmental Effects ........................................................................................................ 15
    2.4 Social Effects ........................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
    2.5 Indirect and Cumulative Impacts............................................ Error! Bookmark not defined.
3. Assessment of Environmental and Social Management System, Capacity, and Performance . 18
    3.1 Legal and Regulatory System.............................................................................................. 18
    3.2 Environmental and Social Management Systems .............................................................. 20
    3.3 Gender Equality, SEA/SH, and Gender-Based Violence ..................................................... 30
    3.4 Grievance Redressal Mechanism........................................................................................ 31
    3.5 Community Engagement .................................................................................................... 32
4. Consultations with Key Stakeholders and Disclosure ........................................................... 34
    4.1 Stakeholder Consultation.................................................................................................... 34
    4.2 Multi-stakeholder Consultation Workshop ........................................................................ 36
    4.3 Disclosure ............................................................................................................................ 36
5. Recommendations and Actions ........................................................................................... 37
    5.1 Exclusion of High-Risk Activities .......................................................................................... 37
    5.2 Summary of Identified Gaps ............................................................................................... 37
    5.3 Recommendations .............................................................................................................. 38
    5.4 E&S Input to DLI/DLRs, and Program Action Plan ............................................................... 39
6. ANNEXURE ......................................................................................................................... 41
    Annexure-1: Review of Applicable Legal and Regulatory Framework ......................................... 42
    Annexure-2: Comparison of Borrower’s System Against Core Principles .................................... 53
    Annexure-3: Strengthening E&S Clauses in the Bidding and Contract Documents ..................... 59
    Annexure-4: Indicative Checklist(s) for Collecting Information for E&S Screening ..................... 61
    Annexure-5: Observations from Field Visit .................................................................................. 63
    Annexure-6: List of Participants in the Multi-stakeholder Consultation Workshop .................... 67




                                                                          Page i

                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                          ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



                                        ABBREVIATIONS
ABHY     Atal Bhujal Yojana
ADO      Agriculture Development Officers
ATMA     Agricultural Technology Management Agency
ATR      Action Taken Report
BC       Backward Caste
BCM      Billion Cubic Meters
BNS      Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita
BOD      Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BPL      Below Poverty Line
C&D      Construction and Demolition
CCA      Cultivable Command Area
CE       Chief Engineer
CESMP    Contractor’s Environmental and Social Management Plan
CHS      Community Health and Safety
CM       Chief Minister
COD      Chemical Oxygen Demand
CPCB     Central Pollution Control Board
DAFW     Department of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare
DC       Deputy Commissioner
DDA      Deputy Director Agriculture
DFO      Divisional Forest Officer
DLIs     Disbursement-Linked Indicators
DLWR     Digital Water Level Recorder
DPR      Detailed Project Report
DSR      Direct Seeded Rice
DWLR     Digital water level Recorder
DWRP     District Water Resources Plan
DWRPC    District Water Resources Planning Committee
E&S      Environmental and Social
EC       Electrical Conductivity
EE/XEN   Executive Engineer
EIA      Environmental Impact Assessment
EIC      Engineer-in-Chief
ESHS     Environmental, Social, Health, and Safety
ESMP     Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESP      Exchangeable Sodium Percentage
ESSA     Environmental and Social System Assessment
FPO      Farmer-Producer Organizations
GMDA     Gurugram Metropolitan Development Authority
GoH      Government of Haryana
GoI      Government of India
GRM      Grievance Redress Mechanism
GST      Goods and Services Tax
GSVA     Gross State Value Added



                                             Page ii

                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                                           ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



HDPE      High-Density Polyethylene
HFD       Haryana Forest Department
HIRD      Haryana Institute of Rural Development
HIRMI     Haryana Irrigation Research and Management Institute
HSPCB     Haryana State Pollution Control Board
HWRA      Haryana Water Resources Authority
IEC       Information, Education, and Communication
INM       Integrated Nutrient Management
IPC       Indian Penal Code
IPM       Integrated Pest Management
IWRD      Irrigation & Water Resources Department
IWRM      Integrated Water Resources Management
JE        Junior Engineer
JFMC      Joint Forest Management Committee
KVK       Krishi Vigyan Kendra
LFPR      Labor Force Participation Rate
M-CADWM   Modernization of Command Area Development and Water Management
MI        Micro-irrigation
MICADA    Micro-Irrigation & Command Area Development Authority
MLA       Member of the Legislative Assembly
MoU       Memorandum of Understanding
MPMV      Mera Pani, Meri Virasat scheme
NABL      National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories
NRM       Natural Resource Management
O&M       Operation and Maintenance
OHS       Occupational Health and Safety
PAP       Program Action Plan
PCR       Physical Cultural Resources
PDMC      Per Drop More Crop scheme
PDO       Program Development Objective
PDS       Public Distribution System
PforR     Program-for-Results
PHED      Public Health and Engineering Department
PIM       Participatory Irrigation Management
PIU       Program Implementation Unit
PMKSY     Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana
PMTC      Project Management Technical Consultant
PMU       Program Management Unit
POP       Package of Practices
PRI       Panchayati Raj Institution
PWD       Public Works Department
RA        Results Area
RTDAS     Real-Time Data Acquisition System
SAR       Sodium Adsorption Ratio
SBD       Standard Bidding Document
SC        Scheduled Caste



                                               Page iii

                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                                          ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



SCADA    Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SDM      Sub-Divisional Magistrate
SDO      Sub-Divisional Officer/ Engineers
SE       Superintending Engineer
SEA/SH   Sexual Exploitation & Abuse/ Sexual Harassment
SHG      Self-Help Group
SOP      Standard Operating Procedure
SPCB     State Pollution Control Board
ST       Scheduled Tribe
STP      Sewage Treatment Plant
TDS      Total Dissolved Solids
TSS      Total Suspended Solids
TWW      Treated Wastewater
VWSC     Village Water & Sanitation Committee
WUA      Water User Association




                                             Page iv

                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                                                  ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



                                          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

E1. INTRODUCTION

1. Haryana is central to India’s food security, producing over 6 percent of national food grains and
contributing significantly to exports, yet its agricultural strength is undermined by unsustainable water use.
Reliance on the wheat–rice rotation, flood irrigation, and ageing canal systems has driven groundwater
depletion, with more than 60 percent of units over-exploited and water tables falling sharply, alongside salinity
and waterlogging in central districts. To address these challenges, the state has prioritized Integrated Water
Resources Management (IWRM) through the Haryana Water Resources Authority (HRWA) and its Integrated
Water Resources Action Plan (IWRAP), which promotes canal rehabilitation, groundwater recharge, micro-
irrigation, crop diversification, and climate-resilient practices supported by farmer incentives. Building on this,
the World Bank’s engagement will introduce global best practices and reform-oriented financing to strengthen
institutions and support the Government of Haryana’s (GoH’s) effort in modernizing irrigation and drainage,
expanding treated wastewater reuse, and fostering participatory water governance, while enhancing
monitoring, accountability, and digital tools to secure Haryana’s long-term water sustainability and
agricultural resilience.

2. The Program Development Objective (PDO) is “improve the efficiency, reliability, and sustainability of
agricultural water use in Haryana”. The proposed Program comprises five Results Areas (RAs) that collectively
contribute to achieving the overall PDO. The result areas include - RA1: Strengthen Institutions for Planning,
Management, and Financing of Sustainable Water Resource Management; RA2: Enhance Efficiency and
Quality of Irrigation Services; RA3: Mobilize Non-conventional Water Resources for Irrigation; RA4: Expand
Micro-Irrigation through Farmer-managed and Sustainable O&M; and RA5: Reduce Agricultural Water
Demand.

E2. ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEM EFFECTS (ESSA)

3. An Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was conducted by the World Bank environmental
and social team for the proposed Water Secure Haryana Program supported by a Program-for-Results (PforR)
financing instrument of the World Bank. The ESSA was carried out to assess the existing institutional,
operational, and regulatory systems and capacities of the implementing agencies to manage Environmental
and Social (E&S) risks, identify gaps, and recommend measures for strengthening them. The ESSA process
involved a desk review of relevant information and documents, technical studies/reports, and information
related to the working of the Irrigation and Water Resources Department (IWRD), Micro Irrigation and
Command Area Development Authority (MICADA), and Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(DAFW) – including their policies, regulatory frameworks, and ongoing programs for managing the
environmental and social aspects, and consultations with them. Field visits were conducted across districts,
including Sonipat, Karnal, Kurukshetra, Rohtak, and Jhajjar, along the canal alignments and waterlogged areas,
and stakeholder consultations were carried out with Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRI) members, WUAs,
drainage committees, farmers, and community groups. Their concerns and feedback were incorporated into
the ESSA findings, shaping program design. Based on the findings, the ESSA formulates recommendations to
strengthen institutional frameworks, enhance system performance, and build long-term E&S capacity.

E3. ASSSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM, CAPACITY, AND
PERFORMANCE

4. The proposed Program has a lot of benefits. The proposed measures under the program aim to reduce
groundwater dependence, enhance water-use efficiency, and build resilience in agriculture. Physical
interventions such as canal rehabilitation, desilting, watercourse restoration, and micro-irrigation expansion
will minimize seepage losses, improve aquifer conditions, and ensure more reliable water delivery.


                                                      Page v

                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                                                ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Complementary initiatives—including crop diversification towards less water-intensive crops toward salinity-
and drought-tolerant varieties, and piloting direct-seeded rice—will conserve water, reduce emissions, and
restore hydrological balance. Alongside infrastructure upgrades, institutional capacity will be strengthened
through the IWRD/ MICADA, and Water User Associations (WUAs), supported by real-time monitoring
systems, skill development, and awareness campaigns. Together, these measures foster climate-resilient
agriculture, improve farmer livelihoods, and position Haryana’s irrigation sector for long-term sustainability.

5. The program also has several environmental and social risks that require careful management. The
environmental risks include dust, noise, and waste generation during construction, impacting local air quality,
and may create disposal challenges. Use of treated wastewater (TWW) without meeting CPCB standards could
pose health hazards. Canal and drainage rehabilitation may inadvertently expand cultivation and intensify
cropping, leading to higher water demand, placing additional strain on already stressed groundwater
resources, and drive-up use of harmful agrochemicals.

6. The program also faces several social risks, including potential land requirements for water storage and
treated wastewater infrastructure, legacy land and compensation claim from landowners, and reliance on
contract labor that necessitates strong labor management practices to safeguard worker rights, health, and
safety. Weak institutional capacity among WUAs could lead to inequitable water distribution, poor operation
and maintenance, and exclusion of vulnerable/ marginalized farmers and women; similar gaps in drainage
societies may also have an impact. Additional risks stem from land transfer (although the need for farmer
consent for drainage installations is a pre-requisite), due to the absence of a formal environmental and social
risk identification mechanism during project preparation.

7. Addressing these challenges will require institutional strengthening, transparent land management
processes, farmer engagement, and inclusive planning to ensure equitable benefits and long-term
sustainability.

8. Haryana has a comprehensive legal and regulatory framework for managing environmental and social
systems, supported by national and state laws, regulations, and technical standards. The Haryana irrigation
and drainage are primarily governed by the Haryana Canal and Drainage Act, 1974 and its Rules of 1976, which
empower the IWRD to construct, maintain, and regulate canals, drains, reservoirs, and tube wells. The Act
provides for land acquisition, compensation, enforcement, and dispute resolution, while also establishing
procedures for water supply, crop-specific restrictions, water rates, and maintenance responsibilities. Canal
Officers are authorized to enforce rules, recover dues, and resolve disputes, with amendments in 1977 and
2018 enhancing accessibility and enforcement.

9. Complementing this framework, the Haryana Water Resources (Conservation, Regulation and
Management) Authority Act, 2020, created the HWRA to regulate both surface and groundwater, set usage
rates, and prepare integrated water resource plans. It also strengthened the role of WUAs in managing water
distribution and financial accountability. Additionally, the Punjab Land Improvement Schemes Act, 1963
(amended in 2018 for Haryana) supports underground pipeline schemes and soil conservation works to
address waterlogging and salinity. At the national level, the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY)
and its Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) component promote micro-irrigation, aquifer recharge, water harvesting,
and reuse of treated wastewater, integrating central and state investments to improve efficiency and
sustainability in irrigation.




                                                   Page vi

                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                                               ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



E4. CONSULTATIONS WITH KEY STAKEHOLDERS AND DISCLOSURE

10. Although the implementing departments and agencies possess a comprehensive institutional framework
with clearly defined roles, responsibilities, systems, and processes, certain areas have been identified that
require further strengthening and alignment with the World Bank’s core principles.

11. Core Principle 1: Program Environmental and Social (E&S) Management System

    •   E&S experts/nodal officers required in IWRD and Agriculture to manage E&S aspects. No departmental
        guidelines or SOPs for identifying and managing E&S risks.
    •   While some E&S clauses are included in the DPRs, bids, and contracts, there is no E&S risk screening
        and no system of including ESMPs with budgets and performance obligations by the contractors.
    •   Limited E&S training and capacity building modules/ opportunities/ programs for departmental staff
        and WUAs. E&S training conducted by HIRMI suffers from inconsistent training materials and relies
        mostly on retired departmental staff. The technical and institutional capacity for O&M functions of
        water courses and TWW-based micro-irrigation systems is low in WUAs.
    •   Absence of established guidelines or SOPs for WUAs/ Drainage Committees concerning O&M, water
        allocation, and grievance redressal mechanisms.
    •   Farmers face weak market incentives to diversify crops, which discourages the adoption of more
        sustainable agricultural practices. There is limited focus on promoting IPM/INM with no annual
        scaling-up targets.

12. Core Principle 2: Natural Habitat and Physical and Cultural Resources

    •   Limited awareness and adoption of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and Integrated Nutrient
        Management (INM) measures.
    •   Water quality assessments are currently limited to salinity and sodicity indicators, omitting the
        analysis of heavy metals (e.g., arsenic, lead, cadmium, chromium) and other contaminants that may
        have potential implications for soil health, livestock, and human safety.

13. Core Principle 3: Public and Worker Safety

    •   Inconsistent PPE usage among laborers at different worksites.
    •   Limited enforcement of labor Camp standards for water, sanitation, hygiene (WASH), and safety. Site-
        specific emergency plans (e.g., for flooding or electrocution) are absent.

14. Core Principle 4: Land Acquisition and Resettlement

    •   No land acquisition is anticipated. However, there may be some legacy issues where, in a small number
        of cases, landowners may claim that the canal’s existing right-of-way (RoW) passes through their land
        and request compensation. The land for water tanks/TWW infrastructure requires comprehensive due
        diligence and resolution to ensure the necessary land is transferred or leased before any work
        commences, facilitating proper implementation.

15. Core Principle 5: Rights and Interests of Indigenous People

    •   There are no Scheduled Tribes (STs) in Haryana. However, there are other vulnerable groups requiring
        attention. For instance, participation by women is below 5% in WUAs, and tenant farmers or
        sharecroppers are often excluded from formal membership.




                                                  Page vii

                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                                                 ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



16. Core Principle 6: Social Conflict

    •   The program is not expected to result in any social conflicts; however, a functional Grievance Regress
        Mechanism (GRM) is important with consolidated reporting. Currently, reliance on online GRM
        platforms limits accessibility for citizens without internet access or digital literacy. Also, the
        mechanisms of citizen feedback systems and disclosure protocols need to be strengthened in line with
        Atal Bhujal program.

E5. RECOMMENDATIONS AND ACTIONS

17. Program Exclusion: The Program will strictly exclude any activity that contravenes World Bank eligibility
requirements for PforR financing, particularly those posing high environmental or social risks. Exclusion criteria
cover subprojects involving significant land acquisition and displacement, conversion or degradation of critical
habitats or cultural heritage, major water resource changes including noncompliant treated wastewater,
large-scale pollution or hazardous waste beyond handling capacity, use of banned agrochemicals, crop residue
burning, activities that marginalize or create conflict among social groups, large-scale exploitation of forests
or biodiversity areas, civil works on land not yet acquired or those endangering community health and safety,
and any activity violating central or state environmental and social laws.

18. Key Recommendations to address the identified gaps includes as below:

      i. Appoint/ depute/ designate focal E&S specialists in PMU and all PIUs (i.e. IWRD, MICADA, and DAFW)
     ii. Draft WUA byelaws developed, defining their roles and responsibilities, financial powers,
         accountability, and integration of women in WUA executive committees
    iii. Integration of E&S clauses, process for risk identification, and mitigation measures/ ESMP into DPRs,
         bidding documents, and civil works contracts
    iv. Develop training modules on relevant E&S issues covering IWRD, MICADA, Agriculture Department,
         and WUA, such as on
         a) Equitable/ participatory water management
         b) Agriculture emission management
         c) Efficient and sustainable use of natural resources
         d) O&M of TWW units, water courses, and micro-irrigation (MI) systems
         e) Upgraded package of practice for DSR and IPM/INM
         f) Training on field level implementation of DSR, including village level demonstration plots, farmer
              field schools and hands-on guidance for risk mitigation
         g) Other relevant areas as necessary
    v. Plan and organize E&S capacity building opportunities for IWRD staff, consultants, and contractors for
         improved DPR preparation with ESMP, better monitoring, and enhanced implementation of civil works
         by contractors.
   vi. Citizen feedback systems and disclosure protocols are developed and institutionalized at the
         community level following the Atal Bhujal Model.
  vii. Strengthen GRM with toll-free number & analyze grievances to identify hotspots/ trends.
 viii. Develop a consolidated GRM and Social Inclusion dashboard for IWRD and MICADA for regular
         monitoring and follow-up.
   ix. Ensure fit-for-purpose quality standards & safeguards for TWW (following end-use–specific standards
         in line with global best practices e.g. EU Directive 2020/741, WHO guidelines, and Indian CPCB norms),
         monitoring, and safety protocols, and disclosure at TWW sites.
    x. Assign annual targets for scaling up IPM/INM. And monitor IPM/INM adoption and pesticide and
         fertilizer consumption as part of DSR / crop diversification activities.




                                                    Page viii

                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                                                ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



  xi.    Streamline subsidy payment processes against DSR and crop diversification in a timely manner, as
         payment delays hamper adoption and scaling up. Need to revise the POP for DSR/IPM with improved
         technical inputs and scale up demonstration plots across program areas.
  xii.   Invest in developing intensive IEC materials and activities to build farmer awareness and capacity for
         adoption of responsible agriculture practices.

19. Based on the recommendations above, the following actions are proposed for inclusion in the DLIs/ DLRs;
and Program Action Plan to address the critical gaps identified between the Program systems and PforR core
principles. The remaining recommendations will be addressed through inclusion in the Program Operations
manual.

20. Input to DLI/DLRs: The following actions are proposed for inclusion in the DLI/ DLRs:

      i. DLR#1.4: Development of SOPs for WUAs and drainage societies covering participatory water
         management, and TWW reuse safety protocols in alignment with CPCB norms and protocols adopted
         under the Program.
     ii. DLR#1.4: Embedding E&S clauses, screening requirements, and ESMP obligations into DPRs, bidding
         documents, and construction contracts
    iii. DLR#1.5: Draft WUA byelaws defining their roles and responsibilities, financial powers and
         accountability, and integration of women in WUA executive committees including O&M.

21. Input to Program Action Plan: The following actions are proposed for inclusion in the Program Action Plan.

 Action Description          Responsibility     Timing                             Completion Measurement
 Appoint, depute or          All                One time         Within one year   Government orders issued
 designate E&S focal         Implementing                        of Program        formally designating E&S
 points at the Executive     Agencies                            effectiveness     focal points in IWRD units,
 Engineer level in each                                                            MICADA, and DAFW
 IWRD Unit, MICADA, and
 DAFW
 Develop and                 All                One time         Within two        Approved guidelines and
 institutionalize citizen    Implementing                        years of          operational systems cfor
 feedback systems and        Agencies                            Program           citizen feedback and
 disclosure protocols at                                         effectiveness     disclosure established at
 the community level                                                               the community level
 Develop training modules    All                One time         Within two        Training modules on
 on key E&S aspects for      Implementing                        years of          relevant E&S issues
 IWRD, MICADA, DAFW          Agencies                            Program           developed, approved and
 and WUAs                                                        effectiveness     made available for use,
                                                                                   consistent with ESSA
                                                                                   recommendations,
                                                                                   including on Institutional
                                                                                   and E&S aspects, PIM,
                                                                                   O&M, TWW reuse,
                                                                                   IPM/INM, natural resource
                                                                                   management, including
                                                                                   crop diversification, and
                                                                                   DSR field implementation
                                                                                   etc.

22. E&S Recommendations to be operationalized through Program Operations Manual (POM): Additional
ESSA actions will be operationalized through the Program Operations Manual (POM), including the following:



                                                    Page ix

                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                                           ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)




    i. Standardized screening checklists and ESMP templates as part of DPRs
   ii. Strengthen GRM with toll-free number & analyze grievances to identify hotspots/ trends.
  iii. Develop a consolidated GRM and Social Inclusion dashboard for IWRD and MICADA for regular
       monitoring and follow-up.
  iv. WUA and Drainage Society capacity building on E&S aspects based on standard training modules
       developed under the Program including on the following:
       • Equitable/ participatory water management
       • Agriculture emission management
       • Efficient and sustainable use of natural resources
       • O&M of TWW units, water courses, and micro-irrigation (MI) systems
       • Upgraded package of practice for DSR and IPM/INM
       • Training on field level implementation of DSR, including village level demonstration plots, farmer
            field schools and hands-on guidance for risk mitigation
       • Other relevant areas as necessary.
   v. Assign annual targets for scaling up IPM/INM. And monitor IPM/INM adoption and pesticide and
       fertilizer consumption as part of DSR / crop diversification activities.
  vi. Revise the package of practices (POP) for DSR/IPM with improved technical inputs and scale up
       demonstration plots across program areas.
 vii. Invest in developing intensive IEC materials and activities to build farmer awareness and capacity
       for adoption of responsible agriculture practices. and
viii. Enhanced water quality monitoring and disclosure




                                               Page x

                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                                                          ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



                                                    1. INTRODUCTION
1.1    BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT

1. Haryana is a critical contributor to India’s food security, generating over 6 percent of national food grains
from only 1.3 percent of the country’s land area1 and supplying 11 percent of rice and wheat distributed
through the Public Distribution System (PDS)2 and contributing 5 percent of India’s total agricultural exports,3
including 40 percent of all basmati rice exports. This performance is supported by an extensive irrigation
network and a dominant wheat–rice production system across 3.69 million hectares of cultivable land, 92
percent of which is irrigated.4 However, the sustainability of this agricultural base is increasingly at risk due to
structural water constraints. The State faces an arid climate, high rainfall variability, ageing canal
infrastructure, and widespread reliance on groundwater, while waterlogging and salinity in central districts
further limit productive potential.

2. The State’s water balance has become increasingly unsustainable. In 2023, total gross water demand
reached 42 bcm against renewable availability of only 30 bcm5, with agriculture accounting for more than
four-fifths of consumption. Declining surface water reliability and deteriorating canal systems have
accelerated the shift toward groundwater extraction, resulting in 63 percent of irrigated area being dependent
on tubewells. This has led to severe aquifer depletion: by 2024, over 61 percent of groundwater assessment
units were classified as over-exploited, and the average water table depth had more than doubled since 2000.
Concurrently, 7–8 percent of the State’s area is affected by waterlogging and over 7 percent by salinity,
reducing soil productivity and, in some cases, rendering land unfit for cultivation,6 particularly in the central
districts. Without substantial reforms in irrigation service delivery, crop diversification, micro-irrigation
adoption, and climate-resilient agricultural practices, the deficit is projected to intensify.

3. In response, the Government of Haryana has elevated water security and Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM) as strategic priorities. The Haryana Water Resources Authority (HRWA), established in
2020, has led the development of the Integrated Water Resources Action Plan (IWRAP) 2023–25 and its 2025–
27 update, prepared collaboratively with 11 departments through district-level water resource plans. IWRAP
provides a unified, data-driven framework for prioritizing investments in groundwater recharge, canal
rehabilitation, drainage improvement, treated wastewater reuse, micro-irrigation expansion, and climate-
smart agriculture. Implementation has commenced across more than 79,000 hectares. By integrating
infrastructure development, institutional coordination, and behavioral change within a results-oriented
monitoring system, IWRAP positions Haryana to transition toward a more sustainable, district-based, and
technically robust water resource management regime.

4. The IWRAP serves as a crucial platform for advancing integrated water resources management (IWRM)
in Haryana by turning technical assessments into coordinated actions. With IWRAP, the State can better direct
investments to areas facing significant resource stress, issues with waterlogging, and inefficient water use.
Agencies have started implementing IWRAP through vertical and subsurface drainage projects over more than
79,000 hectares, rehabilitating irrigation canals and watercourses, enhancing groundwater recharge via check
dams and pond restoration, reusing treated wastewater, expanding micro-irrigation systems, and encouraging
climate-smart, water-saving farming techniques like direct rice seeding, crop diversification, planting stress-

1 Department of Economic and Statistical Affairs, Economic Survey of Haryana 2024-25, Government of Haryana, pp. 3, 39
2 Department of Food & Public Distribution, Annual Report 2024–25, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution,

Government of India, pp. 31-32.
3 Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA), AgriExchange – Production Statistics, accessed

June 27, 2025, https://agriexchange.apeda.gov.in/Production/Indiacat/Index.
4  Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Vitals of Agriculture Statistics, Government of Haryana,
https://agriharyana.gov.in/la-website/Statistcs/Vital_Of_Agriculture.
5 Haryana Integrated Water Resources Action Plan, 2025.
6 Haryana Water Resources Authority, Haryana Water Resources Atlas 2025, p. 50, “Waterlogged Area (Pre-monsoon)”.




                                                            Page 1

                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                                               ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



tolerant crops, conservation tillage, and green manuring. By combining infrastructure upgrades, changes in
agricultural practices, and improved institutional coordination within a results-oriented monitoring system,
IWRAP lays the groundwork for district-based, data-driven, integrated water resource planning—setting
Haryana up for an expanded IWRM phase.

5. The World Bank can leverage global experience, technical expertise, and reform-oriented financing to
Haryana’s water and agriculture sectors. The engagement will build on the state’s IWRAP, through integrated
reforms across institutions, infrastructure, and agriculture to address water stress and improve service
delivery. The World Bank will support the state in adopting best practices in irrigation and drainage
modernization, treated wastewater reuse, climate-resilient agriculture, and participatory water governance.
The Program will strengthen monitoring, evaluation, and accountability systems, facilitate the design and
rollout of digital tools, promote climate-adaptive strategies, and support the evolution of IWRAP from short-
term planning cycles toward a long-term IWRM approach essential to water security.

1.2     PROGRAM DESIGN AND COMPONENTS

6. The Program Development Objective (PDO) is “improve the efficiency, reliability and sustainability of
agricultural water use in Haryana.” The proposed Program-for-Results (PforR) Program (P’, the Program) will
support selected activities of the government’s program that conform to the World Bank’s PforR policy. The
achievement of the PDO will be measured through Outcome 1: Improved efficiency and reliability of irrigation
service delivery, through (a) People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (CRI, number, gender
disaggregated), (b) Proportion of agricultural water demand supplied through canal irrigation (percentage),
and (c) Share of outlets receiving water as per notified schedule (percentage); and Outcome 2: Improved
sustainability of agricultural water use through (a) Area brought under water-efficient agricultural practices
(hectares), and (b) Groundwater assessment blocks showing non-declining groundwater level trends
(number).


7. The Program will support the GoH through the following five Result Areas (RAs).

      a) RA1: Strengthen Institutions for Planning, Management, and Financing of Sustainable water
          resources management. RA1 will enhance Haryana’s institutional and financial capacity for
          integrated, data-driven, and resilient water resources management. RA1 will lay the foundational
          blocks for future demand-site management and water allocation reforms by strengthening planning,
          monitoring and management under the State’s IWRM framework. RA1 will incentivize:
           i. statewide data and analytical systems for integrated planning, including sub-basin-level water
              resource databases, improvements to the state’s irrigation system asset inventory, and
              preparation and public disclosure of annual water budgets;
          ii. operationalized institutional arrangements for IWRM, including enforced inter-agency roles and
              coordination mechanisms across HWRA, IWRD, and DAFW, and functioning multi-stakeholder
              participatory committees within IWRD units;
         iii. improved planning instruments aligned with IWRM principles, including an IWRM 2047 Vision, and
              upgraded IWRAP with basin-level planning and enhanced results monitoring and feedback
              protocols;
         iv. adoption of sectoral protocols and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for sustainable water
              management, including conjunctive use, TWW reuse, vertical and sub-surface drainage, WUA-
              based micro-irrigation co-management, integration of environmental and social risk screening
              into project preparation and contracting, and water-efficient and diversified cropping systems;
          v. development of draft bylaws for PIM through WUAs;
         vi. establishment and adoption of a framework for energy-efficient modernization of lift irrigation
              systems under the Lift Canals Unit (LCU), anchored in energy performance audits, establishment



                                                    Page 2

                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                                                            ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



              of baseline energy performance, adoption of an energy performance improvement plan, and
              implementation of efficiency measures resulting in measurable reductions in energy
              consumption.
         vii. operationalization of irrigation service performance benchmarking through an Irrigation
              Performance Assessment (IPA) tool, including ET-based baseline establishment, annual
              benchmarking, and incentives for most improved canal commands; and
        viii. development of frameworks for public-private partnerships (PPP) and private financing by
              identifying feasible opportunities and standardizing contract guidelines for irrigation service
              delivery, MI, and TWW reuse.
          ix. RA1 will also support the establishment of dedicated technical units within IWRD, reorganization
              of departmental functions, and strengthening of the operational capacity of key water agencies
              through targeted training7 on IWRM, PIM, and advanced monitoring methods. It will further
              support capacity building and institutional strengthening of sub-basin committees and WUAs on
              basin planning, water budgeting, PIM, and O&M, and integration of gender and social inclusion
              considerations in planning and decision-making processes.

    b) RA2: Enhance Efficiency and Quality of Irrigation Services: RA2 will improve access to reliable,
        equitable, and climate-resilient irrigation services in up to 15 irrigation commands, ensuring that
        water reaches farms when and where it is needed. RA2 will incentivize:
         i. modernization of canal systems through refurbishment of canal networks and water courses, and
            deployment of supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems, real-time data
            acquisition systems (RTDAS), and digital dashboards for real-time monitoring and decision-
            making;
        ii. introduction of Performance-Based Contracts (PBCs) with private irrigation service provider(s) for
            irrigation service delivery in selected commands
       iii. stabilization of groundwater levels in selected groundwater assessment blocks through the
            implementation of conjunctive-use management, aligned with RA4 and RA5 interventions to
            promote sustainable micro-irrigation and less water-intensive cropping systems.

    c) RA3: Mobilize Non-conventional Water Resources for Irrigation8: RA3 will increase irrigation water
        supply and enhance drought resilience through the mobilization of non-conventional water sources.
        RA3 will incentivize:
         i. creation of additional offline water storage in low-lying areas to harness monsoon surplus, excess
            canal water, and drainage water to supplement irrigation and groundwater recharge
        ii. recovery of drainage water through sub-surface and vertical drainage measures, augmenting
            irrigation supply and reclaiming waterlogged and saline land for productive cultivation, with the
            reclaimed areas subsequently transferred to drainage user groups for continued maintenance
       iii. development and operationalization of treated wastewater reuse systems – implemented in line
            with the reuse protocols established under RA1 – by connecting Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs),
            managed by Public Health Engineering Department (PHED) and Gurugram Metropolitan
            Development Authority (GMDA), with irrigation command areas, and integrating them into
            MICADA and district-level irrigation service delivery plans.

    d) RA4: Expand Micro-Irrigation through Farmer-managed and Sustainable O&M: RA4 will enable
       farmers to adopt efficient, solar-powered, WUA-managed irrigation systems and assume greater
       technical and financial responsibility for their O&M. These measures will improve on-farm irrigation

7 Training programs will be developed in coordination with key institutions, including the Haryana Irrigation Research & Management

  Institute (HIRMI), Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (CSSRI), Haryana Institute of Rural Development (HIRD) and Chaudhary
  Charan Singh Haryana Agriculture University, Hisar (HAU).
8
  At the time of this E&S systems assessment, RA3 included an intervention on bio-drainage through plantations and afforestation led
by the Haryana Forest Department (HFD). This was later excluded from the Program as per IWRD letter dated 11 March 2026 to the
PCCF, HFD, GoH.


                                                             Page 3

                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                                                          ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



          efficiency, reduce water losses, and create a more sustainable and farmer-driven irrigation
          management model. RA4 will incentivize:
           i. scale-up of co-management models that progressively transfer O&M responsibility of sections of
               irrigation infrastructure up to farm outlets to WUAs, supported by performance-based
               partnerships with contractors; and
          ii. expansion of on-farm MI (including sprinkler and drip systems and pilots with center pivots)
               through WUA clusters, supported by vendor engagement for equipment, AI-enabled digital cluster
               initiatives, and clear arrangements for O&M.

      e) RA5: Reduce Agricultural Water Demand: RA5 will support agricultural water demand management
          as a complement to basin- and command-level water resources management. It will promote less
          water-intensive and climate-resilient cropping systems as demand management instruments to
          reduce irrigation water use and relieve pressure on groundwater. The Program will work directly with
          farmers to enable changes in crop choice, irrigation intensity, and on-farm practices, coordinating with
          existing agricultural incentive schemes and extension services. Specifically, RA5 will incentivize:
           i. expansion of area under crop diversification, thereby reducing the area under paddy
          ii. promote DSR in paddy-prominent areas
         iii. scale-up improved, climate-resilient agronomic practices and sustainable land management (such
              as bio-inputs and green manuring) through demonstration farms, supported by extensive
              Information, Education, and Communication (IEC) initiatives based on the Farmer Field Schools
              approach
         iv. pilot and expand salinity- and drought-tolerant crop varieties with tailored extension services
          v. strengthen sustainable land and water management practices in reclaimed areas through site-
              specific agronomic guidance, digital monitoring of water use, and climate advisory systems

1.3     GOVERNMENT PROGRAM AND BANK-FINANCED PROGRAM (P VERSUS P)

8. The Scope of the Government and Bank-financed program is presented in Table below.

               Government program                     Program supported by the Reasons for non-alignment
                                                      PforR
Objective      Reduce the water demand –              Improve the efficiency,          The Program has specific focus on
               availability gap through individual    reliability and sustainability   integrated solutions to reduce
               agency-based interventions.            of agricultural water use.       water use for agriculture.
Duration       2023 onwards                           2026-2032                        The Program will support part of a
                                                                                       long-term action plan that the
                                                                                       state intends to implement in
                                                                                       slices of 2 years.
Geographic Haryana                                    Haryana
coverage
Result         The program addresses the water        RA1: Strengthen Institutions     The Program will mainly focus on
Areas          demand-supply gap across               for planning, management,        water services that benefit
               agriculture, horticulture, industry,   and financing of sustainable     irrigated agriculture, as it is the
               infrastructure, power, fisheries,      WRM                              largest water user and offers the
               forests & wildlife, domestic use,      RA2: Enhance Efficiency and      highest potential for water
               and livestock through various          Quality of Irrigation Services   savings.
               supply-side and demand-side            RA3: Mobilize Non-
               interventions including canal and      conventional Water
               watercourse rehabilitation, pilots     Resources for Irrigation
               on sub-surface drainage,               RA4: Expand Micro-
               groundwater recharge measures,         Irrigation through Farmer-
               tertiary treatment of wastewater



                                                            Page 4

                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                                                           ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



               for agriculture reuse, promotion        Managed and Sustainable
               of micro-irrigation schemes, and        O&M
               promotion of agronomic practices        RA5: Reduce Agricultural
               and crop diversification under          Water Demand.
               state programs.
 Overall       US$1,500 million                        US$500 million
 financing

9. Program Beneficiaries. The Program will benefit approximately 4.5 million people. The Program combines
statewide reforms with concentrated investments in selected irrigation clusters, complemented by area-
specific activities to generate demonstration effects and inform future scaling of water-efficient irrigation and
agricultural practices.
      a. RA1 interventions will strengthen statewide systems for integrated water resources planning,
         management, and governance. These measures will enhance Haryana’s water security and indirectly
         benefit its entire population.
      b. RA2 interventions will modernize irrigation services across 15 irrigation clusters, covering about 58
         percent of the state’s irrigated area. Within these clusters, more than 355,000 ha will see direct
         improvements in irrigation service reliability, including about 129,000 ha that will benefit from
         associated watercourse lining, reducing conveyance and distribution losses and improving tail-end
         supply reliability. Overall, irrigation services will improve for about 4.4 million people, including
         approximately 800,000 people experiencing direct improvements in irrigation reliability and delivery.
      c. RA3 interventions will improve drainage services to reclaim 40 percent of the state’s total waterlogged
         area, returning recovered drainage water to the system where feasible, while TWW use for irrigation,
         in line with approved reuse protocols, will be demonstrated through selected area-specific
         implementations. These activities are expected to benefit approximately 200,000 people.
      d. RA4 interventions will scale up micro-irrigation through cluster-level pilots in the selected 15 irrigation
         clusters, benefiting about 50,000 people through improved on-farm irrigation efficiency and
         strengthened WUA-managed O&M arrangements.
      e. RA5 interventions will scale up water-efficient cropping practices, with DSR and crop diversification
         implemented in one or more irrigation clusters to achieve saturation-level adoption and maximize
         demonstration value and downstream value-chain benefits. Currently, DSR is practiced on about
         160,000 ha and crop diversification covers about 8,000 ha in the state. Under the Program, adoption
         of DSR will expand by 50 percent, while the area under crop diversification will increase threefold,
         benefiting approximately 200,000 people.
1.4     PROGRAM IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES

10. IWRD will serve as the nodal Implementing Agency (IA), with MICADA, and DAFW serving as the other
IAs. Program management will be led by a Program Management Unit (PMU) housed within IWRD. The PMU,
which has been notified, is led by the Program Director from IWRD and comprises representatives from
MICADA, and DAFW, along with technical officers from IWRD’s five units,9 and specialists covering fiduciary,
environment and social, M&E, and IT/Geographic Information Systems (GIS) functions. The PMU will engage
a PMTC to provide specialized technical support, particularly for activities under RA1, assist in consolidating
information required to document the achievement of DLIs, and extend overall program management
support.

11. Program Implementation Units (PIUs) have been established within IWRD, MICADA, and DAFW to oversee
the implementation of their respective Program activities. The PIUs are led by the respective Chief Engineers
in IWRD and MICADA, and the Director in. Field-level Implementation Units will be set up at Division offices
under the supervision of Executive Engineers, reporting to the Circle offices headed by Superintending

9 Yamuna Water Services (North), Yamuna Water Services (South), Bhakra Water Services, Lift Canals Unit, Construction Division




                                                             Page 5

                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                                                             ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Engineers,10 for IWRD and MICADA, while district-level units will be established for DAFW to support
implementation on the ground.

12. A State Level Steering Committee (SLSC) has been constituted to provide policy guidance, strategic
direction, and oversight, including coordination across ministries, departments, and agencies. The SLSC will be
chaired by the Chief Secretary, GoH. Its members will include the Heads of the Departments of IWRD (acting
as Member-Secretary), MICADA, DAFW, PHED, and GMDA. The SLSC will meet at least twice a year to foster
collaboration and resolve inter-departmental and inter-agency issues. District Level Steering Committees,
chaired by the Deputy Commissioner, have also been constituted to foster convergence of Program activities
at the district level. The Figure below illustrates the program implementation arrangements.




1.5     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT

13. The Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was prepared as per the World Bank’s PforR
Financing Policy. The ESSA evaluates the Program’s effectiveness in promoting E&S sustainability and ensures
that effective measures are in place to mitigate potential adverse impacts. Its objectives include identifying
environmental, health, safety, and social effects; reviewing the legal and policy frameworks; assessing the
borrower’s capacity to manage adverse impacts; and recommending actions to address gaps, if any. The ESSA
assesses alignment with six Core Principles:

      a) Promote environmental and social sustainability in the Program design and promote informed
         decision-making
      b) Avoid adverse environmental and social impacts on natural habitats and physical cultural resources
      c) Protect public and worker safety against potential risks
      d) Avoid or minimize land acquisition and/or involuntary resettlements—and where necessary, assist the
         affected people in improving, or at the minimum restoring, their livelihoods and living standards
      e) Give due consideration to the cultural appropriateness and equitable access to PforR Program
         benefits, with special attention to the rights and interests of the Indigenous Peoples and the needs or
         concerns of vulnerable population
      f) Avoid exacerbating social conflict, ensuring comprehensive management of environmental and social
         (E&S) risks during Program implementation




10 “Circle” refers to an IWRD engineering unit consisting of multiple Divisions responsible for technical implementation of irrigation

works, O&M, and field-level reporting. “District” refers to the civil administrative boundary headed by the Deputy Commissioner,
within which various line departments coordinate planning and farmer-facing activities under the Program.


                                                              Page 6

                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



1.6    METHODOLOGY ADOPTED FOR ESSA

14. The ESSA encompasses both the assessment process of a borrower’s system for managing environmental
and social (E&S) risks and the resulting final report. The methodology consists of several steps: analyzing the
E&S impacts of program activities, evaluating the borrower’s management systems, and benchmarking them
against core principles and essential planning elements to identify significant gaps that could influence
program performance. Recommendations are formulated to address these gaps, thereby strengthening the
E&S capacity and performance of institutions, systems, and resources.

15. As part of the ESSA, a comprehensive review was conducted of relevant documentation provided by
implementing agencies, such as IWRD, MICADA, DAFW, and HFD11, supplemented by consultations with these
agencies and other key stakeholders. This included the examination of government policies, legal frameworks,
and program documents, as well as interviews and discussions with officials at both state and field levels—
including representatives from departments and agencies like IWRD, MICADA, DAFW, and HFD. Primary field
visits were conducted along selected canal alignments and waterlogged areas across various districts,
including Sonepat, Karnal, Kurukshetra, Rohtak, and Jhajjar districts, to gather insights. Stakeholder
consultations were also held with field officials, Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), Water User Associations
(WUAs), Drainage committees, farmers, community groups, and other stakeholders regarding E&S systems
between September 2025 and November 2025. Their concerns, feedback, and recommendations have been
incorporated into the ESSA findings and have informed the Program design. A multi-stakeholder workshop
involving all relevant stakeholders will be scheduled to review the draft ESSA findings, collect further feedback
and suggestions, to refine recommendations and program actions, and contribute to the overall Program
design.




11
   Subsequent to this E&S systems assessment, HFD was excluded as an IA from the Program as per IWRD letter dated 11 March 2026
to the PCCF, HFD, GoH.


                                                           Page 7

                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                                                             ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



                     2. ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL EFFECTS

2.1     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL OVERVIEW

2.1.1    ENVIRONMENTAL OVERVIEW

1. Haryana comprises six administrative divisions, 22 districts, 143 blocks, and 7,287 villages12. Its
physiography features the Yamuna–Ghaggar plain, Shivalik hills, semi-desert sandy southwest, and the Aravalli
Range in the south, with four main sub-basins (Ghaggar, Yamuna, Sutlej, and Chautang/other rivers). About
40% of the state drains into the Yamuna Sub-Basin and 60% into the Ghaggar Sub-Basin; several central
districts (e.g., Ambala, Fatehabad, Hisar, Jhajjar, Jind, Palwal, Rohtak, Sonipat) face substantial waterlogging.
Geologically, older alluvium, aeolian deposits, and younger alluvium cover approximately 97% of the area. A
14,000 km canal network (Western/Eastern Yamuna, Bhakra, Sirsa Branch, JLN, BSB) supports irrigation, but
inter-state surface water allocations are variable, pushing reliance on groundwater which now serves
approximately 63% of irrigated area, with tubewell use rising 42% as canal irrigation declined 17%, aided by
pump/electricity subsidies.

2. Groundwater stress is severe: of 143 assessment units, 61.5% are over-exploited, 7.7% critical, 5.6% semi-
critical, and only 25.2% safe; average water table depth fell from 10.75 m (2000) to 22.76 m (2024)13. Central
districts also contend with waterlogging and salinity, approximately 7–8% of the state has shallow water tables
(<3 m)14, and 7.1% of area was moderately or highly salt-affected in 202315 and requires improved drainage
and salt-tolerant crops16. Cropping intensity is highest (>250) in many northern districts and in Palwal; much
of the south, southwest, and central areas are <200, with parts of Hisar, Bhiwani, Jhajjar, and Rewari near or
below 100 due to scarce water, salinity/waterlogging, and less intensive practices.

2.1.2    SOCIAL OVERVIEW

3. Haryana’s population is estimated at 30.2 million (2022–23), representing 2.2% of India’s total, with 42.1%
urban and a density of 667 persons per sq km (above the national 415). Census 2011 recorded 25.35 million
people, 34.9% urban, and 75.6% literacy (84.1% male, 65.9% female). The sex ratio is 893 (NFHS-5, below
India’s 929). Scheduled Castes comprise 20.2% of the population (about 73% rural), and there is no Scheduled
Tribe population. Socio-culturally, the state includes Ahirwal (southwest), Mewat (southeast, Meo Muslim
heritage), Bagar (west, including Bhattiana), Nardak (northeast, Vedic links), and Khadar (Yamuna floodplains).

4. Multidimensional poverty stands at 7.07% (NITI Aayog, 2023), lowest in Ambala and Panchkula and higher
in Mewat, Palwal, and Sirsa. The Services sector contributes 51.2% of GSVA, followed by Industry (32.9%) and
Agriculture (15.9%). Unemployment is 6.1% (2022–23), above the national 3.2%; female LFPR is 20.7% (vs.
37% nationally). Workers are concentrated in Services (40.4%), Agriculture/Forestry/Fishing (29.8%),
Manufacturing (16.1%), and Construction (12.8%)17.

5. Agriculture remains central, with land predominantly in small and marginal holdings (68.6% of holdings,
23.6% of area), while 2.5% large holdings control 21.8% of area; semi-/medium holdings (28.9%) manage
54.6% of area18.


12 HWRA Atlas 2025
13 Haryana Water Resources Authority, Haryana Water Resources Atlas 2025, pp. 121-122, “Average Depth to Water Table Post-

Monsoon 2000-2024” and “Categorization of Villages on the basis of Ground Water Level on June 2024”.
14 Haryana Water Resources Authority, Haryana Water Resources Atlas 2025, p. 50, “Waterlogged Area (Pre-monsoon)”.
15 Haryana Water Resources Authority, Haryana Water Resources Atlas 2025, p. 116, “Salt Affected Areas (2023)”.
16 Ambala, Bhiwani, Charkhi Dadri, Fatehabad, Hisar, Jhajjar, Jind, Mewat, Palwal, Panipat, Rohtak, Sirsa, Sonipat, and Yamunanagar.
17 Summary Report for the State of Haryana. Niti Aayog. July 2025
18 Agricultural Census of Haryana, 2015-16




                                                              Page 8

                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                                                 ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



6. Haryana’s agriculture supports a large share of the population, but the sector is marked by sharp structural
inequities. Small and marginal farmers dominate the landscape, while land fragmentation continues to reduce
viable farm sizes over time. Alongside cultivators, a very large segment of the rural workforce depends on
agriculture without owning land, making wage income—and the seasonal availability of farm work—a central
determinant of vulnerability.

7. Large number of farmers remain under low-return cultivation (often wheat) or are left abandoned,
signaling distress and constrained adaptation options. While drainage and land reclamation can deliver
significant long-term gains, the transition can disrupt incomes and requires strong agronomic support so
farmers can shift to more suitable crops and practices without falling into hardships. Larger and better-
capitalized farmers can typically invest earlier and manage experimentation risks, while small and marginal
farmers often face binding constraints—credit gaps, weak market linkages for diversified crops, and higher
exposure to crop failure. Without deliberate targeting and support, programs can inadvertently accelerate
unequal benefit capture, with the bulk of smaller producers lagging behind.

8. Landless laborers and tenants/sharecroppers. Landless agricultural laborers are especially vulnerable to
shifts in cropping systems because their livelihoods depend on seasonal wage work, often with limited safety
nets. Reducing rice area can lower demand for labor-intensive operations such as transplanting and
harvesting, creating a real risk of income loss during transition even if farm profitability improves. Tenants and
sharecroppers can also be excluded when program eligibility and services rely on formal land records; insecure
tenure reduces incentives to invest in longer-gestation improvements and can keep these farmers outside
institutional platforms where benefits are allocated.

9. Gender disparities. Women contribute substantial agricultural labor, but lack formal recognition as
farmers, WUA leaders and face barriers to credit, extension services, and market information. In irrigation
contexts, women are especially vulnerable to exclusion from decision-making, including in Water User
Associations (WUAs), where low representation translates into limited influence over water allocation, service
priorities, and grievance processes.

2.2   ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS OF THE PROGRAM

10. The component-wise environmental and social effects of the program, including the potential benefits,
risks, and impacts, are presented in Table below




                                                     Page 9

                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                                                                                                          ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Result Areas Proposed Activities                  Potential Environmental and Social Benefits            Potential Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
 Result Areas1: Strengthen Planning, Institutions, and Finance for Sustainable WRM
     1.1      • Develop digital water              • More accurate assessment of water                   •   Digital data may require ground-truthing to ensure local
                  resources, digitize irrigation       availability will help in optimizing irrigation       ecological variations are captured.
                  assets, and conduct water            scheduling and monitoring towards
                  budget analysis                      sustainable basin management
     1.2      • Review and clarify institutional • Will help reduce duplication, leading to              •   Clarity of roles and a multi-stakeholder platform will improve
                  roles (HWRA, I&WRD, MICADA,          coherent basin-level planning.                        decision-making, enhance accountability of service delivery,
                  and DAFW) and establish multi- • Stronger coordination and regulatory                      and grievance redressal.
                  stakeholder coordination             oversight will improve groundwater and            •   Functional WUAs will further help in equitable water
                  committee, and functional            surface water use and sustainability                  distribution; however, it may lead to inequitable distribution if
                  WUAs                                                                                       the WUA representation is not inclusive.
     1.3      •    Prepare Haryana IWRM vision       •   Long-term planning supports climate             •   No E&S risks; however, potential inequities if water
                   2047 and upgrade IWRAP for            resilience and sustainable water allocation.        reallocations favor high-value users.
                   basin-level planning and              Also, basin-wide monitoring helps protect
                   monitoring                            wetlands, recharge zones, and ecological
                                                         flows.
                                                     •   It will bring shared understanding among
                                                         stakeholders and will improve planning
                                                         towards enhanced livelihoods and reduce
                                                         conflicts
     1.4      •    Adopt conjunctive use and    •        This will reduce groundwater stress through     •   Treated wastewater that does not meet quality standards may
                   treated waste-water reuse             balanced surface–groundwater use and safe           contaminate soils and/or aquifers. TWW will also pose a health
                   protocols; establish WUA O&M          reuse of treated wastewater.                        risk for workers with direct exposure or accidental contact.
                   framework and crop           •        WUA empowerment with O&M framework              •   Perceived stigma around wastewater reuse may reduce
                   diversification incentives            will strengthen local governance and                adoption
                                                         collective action                               •   WUAs without institutional and technical capacity may become
                                                     •   Crop diversification incentive will help in         dominated by influential groups, excluding smallholders, share-
                                                         demand-side management, and will lead to            croppers, and women
                                                         better soil health                              •   Inadequate market linkages and a lack of appropriate pricing
                                                                                                             mechanisms may limit farmers’ willingness to adopt crop
                                                                                                             diversification undermining water conservation objectives.
     1.5      •    Develop irrigation performance •      Performance metrics encourage efficient         •   Overemphasis on quantitative indicators may ignore ecological
                   assessment (IPA) tool, establish      water use                                           quality



                                                                                   Page 10

                                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                                                                                                           ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Result Areas Proposed Activities                  Potential Environmental and Social Benefits           Potential Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                  baseline, and implement          • Benchmarking with incentives will promote • Caution to be exercised as incentives may also
                  annual performance                    adoption of climate-smart irrigation practices      disproportionately benefit better-resourced areas
                  benchmarking with incentives
                                                   • Performance benchmarking with incentives
                                                        will enhance accountability in service delivery
     1.6      • Identify PPP models and            • This may improve the performance of                 • PPP models will need proper environmental and social (E&S)
                  contract templates for                irrigation services                                 compliance monitoring to prioritize sustainability over only
                  irrigation services                                                                       revenue generation.
                                                                                                         • Potential conflicts with service providers and farmers if service
                                                                                                            standards are not clearly defined
                                                                                                         • Tariff regulation may be required to ensure small and marginal
                                                                                                            farmers are not over-burdened
 Result Area2: Enhance Efficiency and Quality of Irrigation Services
     2.1      • Modernize and refurbish canal • The rehabilitation/ modernization of the                  • The activity involves rehabilitating or modernizing existing
                  networks with SCADA, IoT              canal network will reduce water losses and           canals by lining or relining them, and where necessary,
                  sensors, and digital dashboards       improve flow efficiency, among other                 performing some de-sedimentation and widening of the canal.
                  for real-time monitoring and          benefits, which in turn will help farmers with • It will not require land acquisition and will use existing
                  decision-making                       more water for irrigation and servicing a            alignment and existing government land. However, in some
                                                        larger area through these canals than they           cases, landowners claim that the current canals pass through
                                                        would otherwise do.                                  their land and therefore require compensation, which are
                                                   • The activity would involve procurement and              legacy issues related to canal rehabilitation.
                                                        installation of data measurement tools &          • It is expected that there will be contract laborers involved in
                                                        technologies like Piezometer, DWLR, RTDAS,           the lining/ re-lining of the contract. While the existing bids and
                                                        SCADA, etc. at existing locations/ sites. This       contract documents mention labor management practices
                                                        will have positive environmental and social          that follow legal and regulatory provisions, it is also important
                                                        benefits, supporting real-time monitoring and        to ensure that proper labor management procedures are
                                                        control of irrigation channels, and hence            instituted, including in bids, contract documents, and their
                                                        better distribution of water for irrigation.         implementation, along with the monitoring and reporting of
                                                                                                             these procedures.
                                                                                                          • There is no proper mechanism for identification and
                                                                                                             addressing E&S risks at the time of DPR preparation.
     2.2      • Introduction of Performance- • Will help in a better-maintained                          • Profit-driven decisions may prioritize cost savings over
                  Based Contracts (PBCs) with           infrastructure that reduces seepage,                ecological considerations.
                  private irrigation service            waterlogging, etc.                               • Inadequate environmental monitoring if contract KPIs focus


                                                                                  Page 11

                                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                                                                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Result Areas Proposed Activities                  Potential Environmental and Social Benefits          Potential Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                 providers for irrigation service                                                          only on service delivery.
                 delivery (O&M) in selected                                                             • However, an opportunity exists for enhanced compliance with
                 commands                                                                                  environmental norms through contractual obligations.
                                                                                                        • Risk of exclusion if service providers prioritize high-demand or
                                                                                                           high-paying users
Result Area3: Mobilize Non-conventional Water Resources for Irrigation
      3.1     • Creation of additional offline • Availability of surface water for irrigation           •    Waterlogging and/or salinity if storage is poorly sited or not
                  water storage in low-lying        during dry spells, reducing pressure on                  maintained
                  areas to harness monsoon          groundwater.                                        •    Loss of natural habitats if storage structures replace
                  surplus and drainage water to • Enhanced groundwater recharge                              ecologically sensitive areas
                  supplement irrigation and
                                                • Enhanced reliability on irrigation water             •    Need for land acquisition for water storage structures
                  groundwater recharge
                                                    supply, especially, and reduced crop losses        •    Unequal access if storage benefits are captured by upstream or
                                                    from localized flooding/waterlogging                    influential farmers.
                                                                                                       •    Maintenance burden on communities if O&M responsibilities
                                                                                                            are unclear
      3.2     •   Scale up sub-surface and        •   This offers significant benefits by controlling •      Saline drainage effluent may contaminate nearby water
                  vertical drainage systems           soil salinity and waterlogging, leading to a           bodies if not properly disposed.
                  interventions in waterlogged        substantial increase in crop yields, crop        •     Potential impact on wetlands if drainage alters natural
                  areas                               intensification, and farm income by                    hydrology
                                                      reclaiming unproductive land for cultivation.
                                                                                                      •     Conflicts over drainage outfalls if effluent flows through
                                                  •   Lower salinity levels through controlled              neighboring lands.
                                                      drainage and salt leaching, and restoration of
                                                                                                      •     Risk of inequity if interventions prioritize high-value command
                                                      soil health and productivity in chronically
                                                                                                            areas.
                                                      affected areas.
                                                                                                      •     Need for skilled maintenance, which may not be available
                                                  •   Higher agricultural productivity and improved
                                                                                                            locally among farmers, and high O&M costs may limit adoption
                                                      farmer incomes, and better land value
                                                                                                            by smallholders.
      3.3     •   Scale up systems for safe reuse •   This will benefit farmers with enhanced           •   It is expected that only government land or Panchayat lands
                  of treated wastewater (TWW)         irrigation through the transfer of water to           will be used for water tanks and for the alignment of pipes
                  in irrigation                       deficit areas.                                        along the road. However, the social risks may emerge from
                                                  •   This will involve water storage in water-             any requirement of private land for the water storage tanks
                                                      deficient areas, which will also help recharge        and/or for pipe alignments. And the need for proper due
                                                      groundwater, and hence benefit farmers with           diligence, including that the land gets transferred/ leased



                                                                               Page 12

                                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                                                                                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Result Areas Proposed Activities                     Potential Environmental and Social Benefits         Potential Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                                                         greater availability of water for irrigation.        before commencement of the works.
                                                      • This may also result in improved nutrient          • Also, the social risks will emerge from construction-related
                                                         recycling and potential for reducing chemical        processes, labor management, and health and safety
                                                         fertilizer use.                                      measures.
                                                      • Higher agricultural productivity and improved • Environmental risk emerges from the quality of the treated
                                                         farmer incomes, and better land value                wastewater and its regular monitoring before being supplied
                                                      • Cost savings for farmers on drawing                   for irrigation. Proper monitoring and maintenance of the
                                                         groundwater, and with nutrient-rich water            conveyance and distribution network is required to prevent
                                                                                                              leaks. Leakage of TWW can cause soil, surface and
                                                                                                              groundwater contamination.
  Result Area 4: Expand Micro-irrigation and Transition to Farmer Managed and Sustainable O&M
      4.1      • Scale up cluster-based micro- • Significant water savings through precise                 • The distribution of water is based on the warrabandi system19
                   irrigation systems in command         application and reduced conveyance losses            and managed by the WUA, which is also responsible for
                   area                                  using technologies like drip and sprinkler,          collecting and depositing 1% of the cost from the beneficiary
                                                         with pressurized water supplied using solar          farmers, and O&M of the watercourse/ micro-irrigation
                                                         pumps and the use of groundwater or water            systems – this requires technical and institutional capacity for
                                                         storage tanks fed through canals.                    proper functioning and guidance for participatory irrigation
                                                      • This leads to high water efficiency and               management, ensuring equitable distribution of benefits.
                                                         reduced water losses. This increases crop         • Risk of elite capture in cluster formation and decision-making.
                                                         yields, reduces operational costs, ensures           Also, high upfront costs may deter small and marginal farmers.
                                                         assured irrigation, and reduces labor
                                                         requirements for irrigation, in turn increasing
                                                         farmer income
      4.2      • Strengthen WUA-contractor            • Better-maintained canals and field channels • Inconsistent maintenance quality if WUAs lack technical
                   co-management models,                 through coordinated scheduling and                  capacity.
                   enabling gradual transfer of full     responsive O&M.                                  • Potential neglect of ecological considerations (e.g., drainage,
                   O&M responsibility to WUAs         • Empowered WUAs with stronger governance              biodiversity) if KPIs focus only on service delivery
                                                         and decision-making capacity.                    • Risk of elite dominance within WUAs, marginalizing small-
                                                      • Shared accountability between contractors            holders and women.

19 The warabandi system in Haryana is a water rotation system that provides equitable irrigation by allocating fixed turns of water based on a pre-determined schedule, ensuring that each

farmer receives water for a specific, proportional duration on a weekly basis. This system is designed to manage water scarcity, improve irrigation discipline, and protect the interests of tail-
end farmers by rationing water proportional to their landholding. The system is based on the Northern India Canal and Drainage Act of 1873 and was formalized to provide a reliable, albeit
limited, supply to cover crop needs across the culturable command area (CCA).


                                                                                            Page 13

                                                                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                                                                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Result Areas Proposed Activities                 Potential Environmental and Social Benefits           Potential Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                                                     and farmers, and greater transparency in          •    Financial burden on WUAs if O&M costs are underestimated –
                                                     O&M expenditures and water distribution.               leading to conflicts between contractors and WUAs over roles,
                                                                                                            payments, or performance.
                                                                                                       •    Uneven readiness across WUAs, leading to inequitable
                                                                                                            outcomes.
     4.3      •   Establish farmer financing      •    Accelerated adoption of water-efficient          •   Risk of intensification and overuse of fertilizer and pesticides
                  mechanisms to support cost-          technologies reduces pressure on                 •   Higher debt burden if financing terms are unclear or
                  sharing for on-farm micro-           groundwater and canals.                              repayment capacity is overestimated, especially for small and
                  irrigation adoption             •    Improved affordability for small and marginal        marginal farmers.
                                                       farmers through credit, subsidies, or blended    •   Exclusion of vulnerable groups if financing requires collateral
                                                       financing options.                                   or formal documentation.
                                                                                                        •   Vendor-driven adoption may lead to inappropriate technology
                                                                                                            choices and maintenance challenges
 Result Area 5: Reduce Agricultural Water Demand
     5.1      • Promote water-efficient            •   Reduced pressure on water resources              •    Low social risk, that requires community engagement with
                  practices, crop diversification,     through adoption of water-efficient practices        farmers and making them aware and educating them about
                  and salinity/ drought resilient      and crop diversification, including promoting        such practices and benefits.
                  varieties through                    direct-seeded rice (DSR), piloting and           •   DSR application may result in lower yields without adequate
                  demonstrations, training, and        expansion of salinity/ drought-tolerant crop         weed/irrigation management and technical guidance.
                  exposure visits.                     varieties to reduce overall water demand.
                                                                                                        •   Appropriate market linkages and price incentives are required
                                                                                                            to ensure farmers are incentivized to adopt crop
                                                                                                            diversification.




                                                                               Page 14

                                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



2.3     ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS OF THE PROGRAM

BENEFITS

11. The proposed measures in Haryana’s irrigation sector are designed to reduce groundwater
dependence and enhance water-use efficiency. Canal rehabilitation, desilting, and watercourse
restoration will minimize seepage losses, increase carrying capacity, and ensure more reliable water
delivery to farmers, thereby improving aquifer conditions and addressing depletion. Complementary
initiatives such as drip irrigation under MICADA, crop diversification toward salinity- and drought-
tolerant varieties, and piloting direct-seeded rice (DSR) will conserve water, reduce methane
emissions, and promote climate-resilient agriculture. Together, these interventions strengthen
agricultural sustainability while securing farmer livelihoods in water-stressed regions.

12. Alongside physical improvements, institutional capacity will be strengthened through the IWRD,
MICADA, and WUAs, supported by real-time monitoring systems that enhance transparency and
water quality oversight. The program also emphasizes sustainable practices, including the reuse of
treated wastewater, reclamation of waterlogged areas through drainage and bio-drainage, and crop
diversification toward salinity- and drought-tolerant varieties. These measures not only restore
hydrological balance and biodiversity but also promote climate-resilient agriculture, positioning
Haryana’s irrigation sector for long-term sustainability and resilience.

RISKS

13. Environmental risks include dust, noise, and waste generation from construction activities, which
can degrade local air quality and create disposal challenges. The reuse of secondary treated
wastewater for irrigation without meeting CPCB standards and applying multiple safety barriers may
increase soil salinity and pose health hazards if crops are consumed raw. Additionally, canal and
drainage rehabilitation could expand cultivation areas and intensify cropping, leading to higher water
demand and potential strain on regional water resources and sustainability.

2.4     SOCIAL EFFECTS OF THE PROGRAM

BENEFITS

14. The proposed Program aims to enhance irrigation efficiency, agricultural productivity, and farmer
livelihoods through canal infrastructure rehabilitation and modernization of monitoring and control
systems, capacity building, and sustainable water management practices. Key benefits include
improved water distribution through real-time monitoring, reduced water losses from canal and
watercourse rehabilitation, enhanced flow efficiency, expanded irrigation coverage through water
storage and transfer, and reuse of treated wastewater (TWW). These efforts also support
groundwater recharge, reclaim waterlogged and saline lands, and thereby increasing crop yields and
farm income.

15. Additionally, the promotion of sustainable agricultural practices, including crop diversity and
micro-irrigation technologies like drip and sprinkler systems—powered by solar pumps and linked to
canal-based water supply—ensures high water efficiency, reduced operational costs, and reliable
irrigation, and in turn increased yield and enhanced farm income.

16. Complementary measures towards strengthening the institutional capacity of IWRD and WUA and
farmer practices through skill development programs and awareness campaigns, fostering community




                                              Page 15

                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



engagement, and further empowering farmers and WUAs for irrigation and drainage management
and O&M, and long-term sustainability in irrigation and water resource management.

RISKS

17. The primary social risks involve legacy land claims and compensation requests from landowners
who allege that canals traverse their private property, as well as potential land requirements for water
storage tanks, TWW tanks, or pipeline alignments. Although the proposal intends to utilize existing
alignments and government or panchayat lands, thorough due diligence is essential to ensure proper
implementation. The engagement of contract labor requires strong labor management practices to
maintain legal compliance, protect worker welfare, and mitigate risks related to health and safety,
labor rights, and community impacts. It is necessary to incorporate enforceable labor management
provisions in bidding and contract documents, accompanied by regular monitoring and reporting.
Additionally, limited institutional capacity within Water User Associations (WUAs) and Drainage
Societies poses concerns regarding equitable water distribution, effective operation and maintenance,
and the inclusion of vulnerable farmers in program benefits.

18. Other potential risks include the need for land (preferably government or Panchayat-owned) for
water storage and treated wastewater infrastructure, which must be carefully managed to avoid any
disputes and have a proper mechanism for land transfer. While sub-surface and vertical drainage
installations do not result in land loss, they require farmer consent and NOC as per government
procedure, and must be followed. The success of these systems depends on proper training and
capacity building of WUA and Drainage Societies and stakeholder engagement to ensure inclusive,
safe, and transparent implementation. In addition, the drainage effluent must be appropriately
disposed to ensure that it doesn’t encroach onto private land or adversely affect farmers’ livelihood.

19. Additional risks stem from the absence of a formal E&S risk identification and mitigation
mechanism during Detailed Project Report (DPR) preparation, highlighting the need for institutional
strengthening, farmer engagement, and inclusive planning to ensure equitable benefits and long-term
sustainability.

2.5     INDIRECT AND CUMULATIVE IMPACTS OF THE PROGRAM

INDIRECT IMPACTS

20. Canal rehabilitation and modernization will generate localized, temporary environmental impacts
such as dust, noise, and construction waste, which must be managed under existing air quality and
waste regulations. While reducing seepage and improving efficiency, expanded canal coverage and
reclaimed land through subsurface and vertical drainage systems may encourage intensified
cultivation, thereby increasing water demand and potentially groundwater extraction. Wastewater
reuse introduces indirect public health risks if effluent quality is not rigorously verified, requiring
monitoring by PHED to prevent pathogen, nutrient, or heavy metal exposure. Additionally,
construction zones pose community health and safety risks from machinery movement, particulate
exposure, and temporary access constraints, which can be mitigated through site-specific CHS
measures and contractor method statements. It is also essential to ensure that unsegregated and
potentially hazardous waste is not collected and reused by local members of the community, as this
poses significant health and safety risks.



CUMULATIVE IMPACTS



                                               Page 16

                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)




21. The interventions present both environmental and social risks alongside potential benefits.
Multiple drainage schemes may cumulatively lower water tables and concentrate salinity at disposal
sites, requiring robust treatment and conveyance systems, while canal rehabilitation and drainage
reduce waterlogging and salinity but risk expanding command areas and increasing water demand.
Soil and water quality could be compromised by pesticide use and construction runoff unless
mitigation is enforced, though proper treatment can curb salinity and erosion. Civil works pose
community health and safety risks through dust, noise, traffic, and labor influx, necessitating strong
engagement and grievance redress mechanisms. At the same time, reclaimed land and the adoption
of drip irrigation can boost agricultural productivity and farmer incomes, supporting livelihoods and
inclusion.




                                              Page 17

                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



         3. ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
                     SYSTEM, CAPACITY, AND PERFORMANCE

3.1   LEGAL AND REGULATORY SYSTEM

SUMMARY OF UMBRELLA FRAMEWORK

1. India maintains a comprehensive legal and regulatory framework for environmental and social
systems, supported by national laws, regulations, and technical standards. In Haryana, irrigation and
drainage are principally governed by the Haryana Canal and Drainage Act, 1974 and its 1976 Rules,
which regulate canal irrigation, drainage, navigation, and water distribution. The Act authorizes the
state to construct and manage canals, drains, reservoirs, and tube wells; enforce water supply
procedures; impose crop‑specific restrictions; and recover water charges. It also provides for land
acquisition, compensation, and dispute resolution, with Canal Officers empowered to enforce
compliance. Amendments in 1977 and 2018 have strengthened implementation and accessibility.

2. Complementing this framework, the Haryana Water Resources (Conservation, Regulation and
Management) Authority Act, 2020 established the HWRA to regulate surface and groundwater, set
water usage rates, and prepare integrated water resource plans. The Act reinforces the role of Water
Users’ Associations (WUAs) in managing distribution and financial functions. Additional state
legislation, including the amended Punjab Land Improvement Schemes Act, 1963 (amended for
Haryana in 2018), supports underground pipeline systems and soil conservation measures to address
waterlogging and salinity. At the national level, the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY)
and its Per Drop More Crop component promote micro‑irrigation, water harvesting, aquifer recharge,
and treated wastewater reuse, aligning central and state efforts to enhance water‑use efficiency.

ENVIRONMENTAL SAFEGUARD

3. Canal Rehabilitation & Civil Works: The canal rehabilitation, lining/relining, desilting, and minor
widening are generally exempt from full EIA requirements unless they expand the command area
(>10,000 ha CCA). Works within the canal right of way may trigger forest clearance (for tree felling),
Wetlands Authority clearance (if near notified wetlands), and local permits for traffic diversions. The
Irrigation & Water Resources Department (IWRD) is the implementing agency, with clearances from
the Haryana Forest Department (HFD), Wetlands Authority, and district administration. Compliance
checkpoints include biodiversity and PCR screening before DPR finalization, turbidity control
measures, C&D waste segregation, hazardous waste segregation and safe disposal, dust control
measures and disclosure of grievance redress mechanisms. Applicable laws include the Environment
Protection Act, 1986, EIA Notification, 2006, Air Act, 1981, C&D Waste Rules, 2016, Forest Act, 1980,
Wetlands Rules, 2017, and Wildlife Act, 1972.

4. Treated Wastewater (TWW) Reuse: Reuse of STP effluent for irrigation requires HSPCB consents,
compliance with CPCB irrigation reuse standards, and MoUs between IWRD, PHED, and MICADA.
Baseline effluent testing, NABL-certified validation, and monthly monitoring for microbiological and
annual monitoring of heavy metals are mandatory. Crop restrictions and suspension protocols must
be documented. Regulations include the Water Act, 1974, CPCB’s 2019 guidelines, and CPHEEO
manuals. Standard clauses require three consecutive compliant test rounds before supply, strict
sampling SOPs, suspension protocols, farmer IEC on safe practices, and sludge handling per HSPCB
rules.

5. Saline Drainage Effluent (SSD/VD Schemes): Subsurface and vertical drainage schemes generate
saline effluent requiring discharge permissions, alignment approvals, and Wetlands screening. DAFW


                                               Page 18

                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



implements, with IWRD coordinating outfalls and HSPCB overseeing water quality. Compliance
checkpoints include effluent EC/TDS thresholds in DPRs, routing to approved disposal sites, vegetated
buffer strips, and monitoring of receiving water bodies. Regulations include the Water Act, 1974, EP
Act, 1986, and Wetlands Rules, 2017. Clauses embed effluent monitoring schedules, prohibition of
discharge into drinking water sources, maintenance of drainage networks, and safety measures
around sumps/trenches.

6. Storage Ponds & Recharge Structures: Construction on government/Panchayat land requires land
transfer documentation, community consent, floodplain permissions, and Wetlands screening. IWRD
is implemented with Panchayats and district administration oversight. Compliance includes site
selection criteria, flood resilience, groundwater monitoring, and community engagement. Excessive
rains during the monsoon season will lead to the overflowing of the canal. This could lead to
waterlogging on-site and will also result in water wastage. Natural vegetation barriers with deep
rooted systems and that are indigenous to the region can be applied along banks to stabilize soil and
reduce erosion. Recharge ponds can be integrated with storage tanks to enhance groundwater
recharge and provide storage for excess water. Regulations include the EP Act, 1986, EIA Notification,
2006, Wetlands Rules, 2017, and the Haryana Canal and Drainage Act, 1974. Clauses embed fencing,
signage, controlled access, emergency overflow routing, and erosion control with native vegetation.

7. Biodiversity & Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) Screening: Projects near forests, wetlands,
riparian zones, or culturally significant sites trigger biodiversity and PCR screening requirements.
Approvals may be needed from the Wetlands Authority, Forest/Wildlife authorities, and
Archaeology/heritage authorities for chance finds. All executing agencies are responsible for
implementation, with oversight by the Haryana Forest Department (HFD), Wetlands Authority, and
Archaeology Department. Compliance checkpoints include a pre-DPR screening checklist, mapping of
no-go zones, embedding chance find procedures in contracts, and scheduling works to avoid sensitive
breeding or migration seasons.

8. The regulatory framework is anchored in the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, Wetlands Rules,
2017, Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, and the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958. Standard clauses require immediate stop work and notification protocols
for chance finds, habitat protection measures, riparian restoration with native species, and strict
prohibition of works in notified wetlands or critical habitats unless approved mitigation and permits
exist.

SOCIAL SAFEGUARD

9. The existing social legislative framework, as applicable to Haryana, is adequate to safeguard social
sustainability and protect the interests of marginalized and vulnerable populations, including
Scheduled Castes (SC) and Backward caste (BC). It provides for (a) protection of SC and BC
communities through targeted safeguards, (b) special measures aligned with traditional and
customary laws of tribal communities in Scheduled Areas, (c) non-discrimination on the basis of
religion, race, caste, or gender, (d) transparency and accountability through the Right to Information,
and (e) the right to fair compensation and rehabilitation in cases of land acquisition and land pooling.
Collectively, these provisions establish a strong legal foundation for equity, inclusion, and justice.
However, effective compliance requires strengthening institutional and technical capacities—
particularly at the state, district, and grassroots levels—to ensure that these safeguards are
consistently implemented, monitored, and enforced.

10. Labor Management and Community Health and Safety (CHS): Labor camps and
worker/community health and safety are governed by the Building and Other Construction Workers



                                               Page 19

                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



(BOCW) Act, 1996, Contract Labor Act, 1970, Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979, and the OSH
Code, 2020. Oversight lies with labor departments and PIUs. Compliance checkpoints include camp
standards (WASH, lighting, waste), worker grievance redress, PPE compliance, and monthly OHS
inspections. Clauses mandate PPE, penalties for non-compliance, incident reporting, confidential GRM
access, and community-facing CHS measures (traffic management, dust/noise control, restricted work
hours).

11. Equity in Water Distribution: Equity concerns arise in canal systems, particularly head–tail
distribution, lift irrigation, and modernization of hydraulic controls. Trigger conditions include
installation of flow measurement devices and updates to warabandi schedules. Approvals are largely
internal, but require community consultation via Water Users’ Associations (WUAs) and data sharing
protocols. Implementation is led by IWRD/MICADA, governance by WUAs, and oversight by the
Haryana Water Resources Authority (HWRA) and IWRD. The compliance checkpoints include
calibrated weirs and flow meters, tamper-proofing, periodic audits, and tracking of equity, such as tail
reliability and hours of supply. The legal basis rests on the Haryana Canal and Drainage Act, 1974
(warabandi and measured delivery), and the Haryana Water Resources Authority Act, 2020
(groundwater regulation and allocation).

12. Gender equity, protection of vulnerable, and social justice: Gender equity and protection are
safeguarded under the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 and the Sexual Harassment of Women at
Workplace Act, 2013, requiring maternity leave, benefits, and Internal Complaints Committees for
timely redressal. Disability inclusion is mandated by the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016,
which enforces universal design principles and accessibility in infrastructure. Social justice and
community rights are reinforced through the Haryana Reservation Policy, ensuring representation of
Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes, and economically weaker sections in employment and training.

INSTITUTIONAL GAPS

13. Despite this layered framework, several gaps persist. The 1974 Canal Act remains canal‑centric
and does not adequately address modern challenges such as groundwater regulation, wastewater
reuse, or climate resilience. Enforcement of warabandi (rotational water supply) is somewhat weak,
with frequent violations and limited accountability. The HWRA, though progressive, faces challenges
in integrating block‑level water plans into a coherent statewide strategy, and its coordination with
agriculture and irrigation departments is still evolving. WUAs are legally empowered but remain
under‑capacitated, with limited farmer participation and weak grievance redress mechanisms.

14. Similarly, while PMKSY promotes micro‑irrigation, uptake is uneven due to financing constraints
and a lack of technical support at the grassroots.

15. Overall, Haryana's framework is robust in scope; however, it faces challenges such as fragmented
institutional coordination, insufficient enforcement, and limited community involvement.
Strengthening these areas will enhance the framework's ability to provide substantive protection and
empowerment, thereby increasing its effectiveness in addressing waterlogging, salinity, and
sustainable irrigation management.

3.2     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ASSESSED AGAINST CORE
        PRINCIPLES

3.2.1    CORE PRINCIPLE 1: PROGRAM ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (E&S) MANAGEMENT SYSTEM




                                               Page 20

                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)




A. IWRD AND MICADA

Assessment of the existing systems

16. The Irrigation and Water Resources Department (IWRD) in Haryana is pursuing a comprehensive
modernization program to improve irrigation efficiency and ensure equitable water distribution.
Central to this effort is the rehabilitation of 114 irrigation channels under the program. Activities
include canal relining, embankment repair, and desilting to restore carrying capacity, while lining
works are expected to significantly reduce seepage losses and enhance water-use efficiency. During
monsoon seasons, the excess water will recharge groundwater, further strengthening the
sustainability of the system.

17. To complement physical rehabilitation works, the IWRD has invested in advanced monitoring and
control technologies, with Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) and Real-Time Data
Acquisition Systems (RTDAS) planned to be installed at 180 locations to provide continuous oversight
of canal operations, water levels, and flow conditions. Additional investments are directed toward
upgrading instrumentation such as digital water level recorders (DLWR), flow meters, simulation tools,
and automatic weather stations, which together enable precise water management, strengthen
transparency and accountability in allocation, and support evidence-based decision-making. These
innovations not only enhance operational efficiency and risk mitigation but also advance the
department’s broader goals of equitable distribution, climate resilience, and participatory governance
with Water User Associations (WUAs).

18. DPR for Canal rehabilitation: Canal rehabilitation will follow standard DPR, tendering, and
contracting steps, and adopt dredging/desilting, vegetation removal, and lining to reduce seepage and
improve discharge; permits and compliance checkpoints are as outlined in Environmental Safeguard
Section (Canal Rehabilitation & Civil Works). Site-specific environmental and social screening and
ESMPs should be integrated into DPRs to avoid approval delays and ensure compliance.

19. Canal rehabilitation in Haryana carries several construction-phase risks, including occupational
health and safety incidents, dust and noise emissions, and improper waste handling. To mitigate these
concerns, construction activities must be managed through site-specific Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs) with strict supervision.

20. Tree Felling and Vegetation Clearances: Tree felling and vegetation clearance requirements may
pose challenges and delays, especially as classification of forest by the HFD, even though the land
belongs to IWRD and the scope of work is within the ROW of the canal. These risks should be identified
early through E&S screening processes, with clear timelines integrated into DPRs and work plans.
Proactive planning will help avoid bottlenecks and ensure compliance with environmental regulations.
To further reduce delays, a pre-approved tree-felling corridor map with a standing tree inventory can
be prepared. This could be jointly validated by IWRD and HFD. Early joint site inspections, batch
processing of clearances, and advance compensatory afforestation planning measures could reduce
approval timelines. Wherever feasible, design adjustments to avoid mature trees should be
prioritized.

21. Worker health and safety remain a critical area of concern. Although PPE is provided, its use is
inconsistent, and contractors must be held accountable for enforcing OHS protocols. Non-compliance
should trigger corrective actions ranging from retraining to suspension or termination. IWRD must
strengthen contract clauses to ensure supervision and enforcement of safety measures, while also
addressing gaps such as dust exposure, labor camp conditions, and the absence of mandates on labor



                                              Page 21

                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                          ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



payments in DPRs. It is also essential to ensure that all laborers receive written contracts that specify
wages, working hours, leave entitlements and conditions of employment in line with national labor
laws.

22. Treated wastewater (TWW) Supply must comply with CPCB irrigation reuse standards with HSPCB
consents and NABL-certified baseline/validation testing prior to supply, and monthly monitoring
thereafter (see Environmental Safeguard: TWW reuse section).

23. Water User Associations (WUAs): A key challenge in canal rehabilitation and modernization
projects in Haryana lies in the limited capacity of WUAs. At present, WUAs are not adequately
equipped to manage operation and maintenance (O&M) responsibilities, which raises concerns about
sustainability once the project’s initial support period ends. To address these gaps, WUAs must
undergo structured training programs to build their technical and managerial capacity, ensuring they
can take over O&M responsibilities after the three-year support period. At present, the WUA trainings
are provided by HIRMI, which lacks standard, structured training modules or institutional training
capacity, and relies on external experts to prepare and deliver trainings, leading to inconsistencies
across training programs due to variations in approach and content. Similarly, farmer training
materials and monitoring need strengthening to ensure adoption of micro-irrigation, reduction in
groundwater extraction, successful crop diversification, DSR application and improved soil health.
Together, these initiatives reflect a holistic approach to canal modernization, combining
infrastructure, technology, farmer support, and institutional accountability. Additionally, farmers
using treated wastewater (TWW) require targeted training to mitigate health risks and ensure
compliance with safety standards, protecting both soil contamination and public health. Furthermore,
targeted capacity-building is essential to institutionalize these groups, specifically by supporting legal
registration and establishing robust financial management systems, including standardized banking
operations and audit-compliant record-keeping.

Key gaps

24. The process of canal rehabilitation and water courses is well laid out within IWRD and MICADA,
including supervision and monitoring by the concerned officials, including Superintending Engineers,
Executive Engineers, SDOs, as per PWD (Public Works Department) Code. However, review of the
DPRs, bids, and contract documents for the canal rehabilitation suggests the need for integrating
environmental and social (E&S) clauses into it.

25. The DPR preparation for canal rehabilitation lacks site-specific environmental and social screening
and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) to identify E&S risks and plan their
mitigation. This will also avoid inadvertent delays caused by the delay in necessary approvals and
clearances from regulatory authorities.

26. The labor management and health and safety aspects are managed through contract conditions
in the Standard Bidding Document (SBD). While the SBD and the contract are aligned with key national
laws on labor management and environmental protection, it lacks sufficient operational detail across
several critical areas. Important gaps include the absence of clear OHS and CHS clauses, inadequate
provisions to prevent and address SEA/SH and GBV, and guidance on labor camp standards. The
document also omits practical requirements for traffic management, waste handling (including C&D
and hazardous waste), and structured processes for E&S screening and preparation of the C‑ESMP.
Additionally, it does not outline grievance redress mechanisms for workers and communities. It does
not specify E&S-related KPIs or performance security measures.




                                                Page 22

                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                                                 ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



27. There are no dedicated labor officers in the IWRD, and in the absence of a detailed guideline/ SoP,
this poses limitations to the supervision and monitoring by the field staff (XEN/ SDO/ JE). Dedicated
E&S specialists are required to determine site-specific on-ground risks and plan mitigation.

28. It is important to ensure that TWW meets the CPCB standards, and instituting close monitoring
will be important. Also, disclosure of this information to the public will be useful in building trust and
the use of TWW for agriculture. In addition, building WUA’s technical capacity to understand the use
of disclosed data and safe reuse practices will help protect public health concerns and soil
contamination.

29. WUAs have limited technical as well as institutional capacity to take over O&M functions after the
water courses and or MIs system is handed over to them. Also, there is an absence of established
guidelines or standard operating procedures (SoPs) for WUAs/ Drainage Committees concerning
O&M, water allocation, and grievance redressal mechanisms.

30. Capacity building for WUA is another critical gap. Training modules for farmers and WUAs are not
standardized, leading to inconsistencies across training programs due to variations in approach and
content.

31. Water quality testing is limited to salinity and sodicity parameters, overlooking heavy metals and
broader contaminants that could affect soil health, livestock, and human safety. Drainage effluent
management has not been fully assessed, raising risks of downstream impacts on private farmer lands,
wetlands and aquatic habitats. Groundwater extraction rates also require closer monitoring,
particularly in overexploited blocks, where recharge measures and water-use efficiency interventions
must be prioritized. Similarly, gypsum application protocols lack site-specific testing for ESP and SAR,
risking under- or over-treatment and nutrient imbalances.

B. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMER WELFARE (DAFW)

Assessment of the existing systems

32. Haryana has launched a series of crop diversification initiatives to address the unsustainable
dominance of paddy cultivation, which has led to severe groundwater depletion and soil degradation.
The state government encourages farmers to shift toward less water-intensive crops such as maize,
pulses, cotton, oilseeds, and horticulture. Farmers receive financial incentives (₹7,000–₹8,000 per
acre) and support services to switch from paddy to sustainable crops.

33. The Mera Pani Meri Virasat (MPMV) program, introduced in 2020, specifically targets “dark zone
– over exploited” blocks where groundwater levels have fallen below critical thresholds. Farmers in
these areas are incentivized to reduce paddy acreage and adopt alternative crops, with additional
support such as MSP procurement and irrigation subsidies. While the program has made progress,
adoption has been slower than expected due to farmer hesitancy, market volatility, and the assured
returns that paddy continues to provide. Despite these challenges, both crop diversification schemes
and MPMV remain central to Haryana’s long-term strategy for water conservation, climate resilience,
and sustainable agricultural growth.

34. The Department of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (DAFW) has been recognized with the silver
SKOCH award for its innovative work in revamping saline and waterlogged soils in Haryana20.
Operating in 541 villages, DAFW has implemented a mix of technical and agronomic measures,

20 “Agriculture and Farmers Welfare Department, Haryana,” SKOCH Ratings, July 14, 2023,

https://ratings.skoch.in/2023/07/14/agriculture-and-farmers-welfare-department-haryana-3/.


                                                       Page 23

                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                                                     ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



including gypsum application for sodic soils, installation of piezometers, and subsurface and vertical
drainage systems. These interventions have lowered the water table by nearly 10 feet, freeing the
root zone for cultivation and improving crop yields. Solar-powered tubewells and sump-to-trencher
pumping systems further support drainage, while farmer drainage societies, formed with sarpanch
approval, oversee maintenance of the infrastructure. NOCs are procured from farmers in cases where
tubewells are infringing on their land.

35. Direct Seeded Rice (DSR) adoption in Haryana presents both opportunities and challenges, and
its feasibility varies significantly across regions. In areas with high water tables or erratic rainfall, DSR
performance has been inconsistent, with risks of crop failure under insufficient or irregular
precipitation. Unlike conventional transplanting, DSR requires precise irrigation schedules and robust
weed control measures, making it more technically demanding. Therefore, identifying priority areas
with suitable agro-climatic conditions is essential before scaling up implementation

36. DSR presents a complex profile of economic and environmental tradeoffs when compared to
conventional puddled transplanted rice (PTR). Scientific studies display mixed results on yield when
comparing DSR to conventional paddy cultivation. Yield reductions of 8.98%21-12%22 have been
observed across India for DSR when compared to PTR. However, with the appropriate technical
capacity, DSR has increased the profit per rupee invested to INR 2.2 compared to INR 1.48 for PTR23.
DSR excels in resource efficiency by reducing water and energy consumption. DSR has shown to reduce
groundwater extraction and energy consumption by approximately 30% when compared to PTR in
Punjab. It has also cut labor and irrigation costs by up to 20%24. In Northern China, utilizing furrow and
drip irrigation allowed DSR to approach traditional yields while maximizing “crop per drop” as per the
water conservation goals of the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana.

37. DSR serves as a powerful tool for climate mitigation despite specific chemical and gas-related
challenges. It drastically reduces CH4 emissions by up to 96.8%25 when compared to PTR. DSR also
reduces global warming potential by 37% and carbon footprint by 34% when compared to PTR26.
However, DSR cultivation has also seen a significant spike in N2O emissions, which can increase by
over 84%27. Furthermore, the shift to DSR has also led to greater insecticide and herbicide utilization
due to increased weed pressure. The reliance on chemical weed control methods has sparked
concerns of potential herbicide resistance. Ultimately, while DSR faces hurdles in yield stability and
chemical management, it offers a sustainable pathway for rice production if paired with technical
capacity, optimal irrigation methodologies, and appropriate pesticide applications.

38. Farmer perceptions remain a major barrier. Many farmers believe DSR is more water-intensive
and yields lower returns compared to traditional methods. This hesitancy is compounded by limited
technical capacity and skepticism about taking risks with their livelihoods. However, DSR can reduce
yields particularly without appropriate capacity. Farmers consistently highlight the need for stronger

21  Kumara, Kiran, et al. "Unravelling trade-offs and synergies of direct-seeded rice in Indian agriculture: A meta-
analysis." European Journal of Agronomy 173 (2026): 127897.
22 Xu, Le, et al. "Comparing the grain yields of direct-seeded and transplanted rice: A meta-analysis." Agronomy 9.11 (2019):

767.
23 Mubarak, Tasneem, et al. "Yield and water productivity of rice as influenced by crop establishment and irrigation methods

under temperate environment." Scientific Reports 15.1 (2025): 29494.
24 Singh, Gurpreet, and Sangeet Ranguwal. "Optimizing Water and Energy use in Rice Production through Direct Seeding in

Punjab, India." Indian Journal of Ecology 51.6 (2024): 1209-1211.
25 Liu, Yueyue, et al. "Direct-seeded rice reduces methane emissions by improving root physiological characteristics through

affecting the water status of paddy fields." Rhizosphere 24 (2022): 100628.
26 Reddy, K. Srikanth, et al. "Meta-analysis of yield-emission trade-off in direct seeded vs. puddled transplanted rice: Towards

a cleaner and sustainable production." Cleaner Environmental Systems 16 (2025): 100238.
27 Hang, Xiaoning, et al. "Effects of water-saving irrigation on direct-seeding rice yield and greenhouse gas emissions in north

China." Agriculture 12.7 (2022): 937


                                                          Page 24

                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                                          ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



incentives and institutional support. Current payments of INR 4,500 per acre are seen as inadequate,
with delays of 5–6 months further discouraging adoption. Suggestions include doubling subsidies to
INR 9,000 per acre, providing machine subsidies, and ensuring timely disbursement. Demonstration
plots in every village and more intensive training programs are considered essential to build farmer
confidence and technical capacity. Additionally, research into short-duration rice varieties is needed
to address climatic constraints. Consultations with farmers and department functionaries emphasize
that reforms must be farmer-centric, combining financial support, technical training, and practical
demonstrations to enable wider adoption of DSR.

39. Agronomic practices present further challenges. Increased rice cultivation has driven higher
pesticide use, with implications for soil and water quality. Integrated pest and nutrient management
measures, coupled with farmer training, are needed to reduce reliance on chemicals and improve soil
organic matter. While DAFW promotes direct-seeded rice (DSR), adoption remains hesitant due to
farmer perceptions of lower yields, increased pesticide requirement leading to increased costs for
farmers, and higher risks under erratic rainfall. Pilots, regular payments, and technical support will be
essential to build confidence in DSR. Crop diversification also requires stronger market linkages, crop
insurance, and promotion of alternatives to rice and wheat to ensure economic viability.

Key gaps

40. Farmers face weak market incentives to diversify crops, which discourages the adoption of more
sustainable agricultural practices. In parallel, market linkages should be developed to guarantee
demand for diversified crops, thereby motivating farmers to shift away from water-intensive
cultivation.

41. Farmers continue to express reservations about adopting Direct Seeded Rice (DSR) due to its
increased risk profile and comparatively lower yields, as it necessitates precise irrigation scheduling
and comprehensive weed management, thus presenting greater technical challenges. To facilitate
adoption, it is essential to translate this technical knowledge into practical, field-level demonstrations
and provide hands-on support. In addition, policy reforms should address subsidies, ensure timely
payments, strengthen market linkages, expand crop insurance coverage, and enhance technical
training for farmers that must include demonstration plots for DSR application.

3.2.2 CORE PRINCIPLE 2: NATURAL HABITAT AND PHYSICAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES

Assessment of the existing systems

42. Pollution Risks: Kurukshetra district, classified as a “dark zone” due to groundwater depletion,
faces additional risks from high pesticide and fertilizer consumption. While Direct Seeded Rice (DSR)
is being promoted to reduce water use, it may inadvertently increase pesticide dependency unless
safeguards are introduced. Pre-screening using E&S checklists must flag such dark zones, and
mitigation should include Integrated Pest Management (IPM) measures—such as crop rotation,
vegetative barriers, and biological controls—and Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) practices
like biofertilizers, soil amendments, and mulching. These interventions will help balance water
conservation with reduced chemical dependency.

43. Water and Soil Quality monitoring: Advanced monitoring systems such as SCADA and RTDAS are
in place, alongside drone-based nutrient mapping, which are significant strengths. However, routine
testing of tubewell water for hardness is lacking, which is critical for micro-irrigation (MI) system
design. Awareness and adoption of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and Integrated Nutrient
Management (INM) measures remain low among farmers. A water quality dashboard should be



                                                Page 25

                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



developed to track compliance and adoption targets, with time-bound goals for IPM/INM
implementation. Intensive IEC (Information, Education, Communication) activities are needed to build
farmer awareness and capacity.

44. Potential risks from treated wastewater (TWW) reuse. Institutional coordination between IWRD,
PHED, and MICADA is vital, particularly for treated wastewater (TWW) reuse. To ensure water quality
meets CPCB standards and does not pose any risks to soil and public/farmer health or contamination,
regular monitoring of wastewater quality will be important.

45. Biodiversity and physical cultural resources: Follow the biodiversity and Physical Cultural
Resources screening and chance-find procedures described in the Environmental Safeguard section
(Biodiversity & PCR Screening), including stop-work and notification protocols under the Wildlife
(Protection) Act and the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act.

Key gaps

46. Awareness and adoption of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and Integrated Nutrient
Management (INM) measures remain low among farmers, and intensive IEC (Information, Education,
Communication) activities are needed to build farmer awareness and capacity.

47. Water quality assessments are currently limited to salinity and sodicity indicators, omitting the
analysis of heavy metals (e.g., arsenic, lead, cadmium, chromium) and other contaminants that have
potential implications for soil health, livestock, and human safety. Additionally, a comprehensive
evaluation of drainage effluent management remains incomplete.

48. Groundwater drawn by tubewells could mobilize geogenic contaminants or legacy agro-industrial
pollution. In addition, the field visit revealed that tubewell groundwater is being used in canals. The
water displayed total suspended solids, which could be natural minerals in the groundwater. This
could potentially clog MI systems.

49. Groundwater extraction rates also require closer monitoring, particularly in overexploited blocks,
where recharge measures and water-use efficiency interventions must be prioritized.

3.2.3 CORE PRINCIPLE 3: PUBLIC AND WORKER SAFETY

Assessment of the existing systems

50. Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) and Community Health and Safety (CHS): Active
supervision and some OHS measures were observed at labor camps, but standards remain
inconsistent. Codes of conduct are not uniformly applied, and worker grievance mechanisms are
underutilized. Construction activities also pose risks to community health and safety, including
exposure to machinery, traffic hazards, and waste handling. There is also risk of community members
reusing construction materials from the site leading to public health risks. Occupational health and
safety measures were observed on site, with workers wearing personal protective equipment (PPE),
though application was not consistent across the workforce. Compliance with the Building and Other
Construction Workers Act, Contract Labor Act, Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, and Occupational
Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code is enforced through ESHS contract clauses and
inspections per the Social Safeguard section.

51. Labor Camps: Labor management during canal rehabilitation presents another set of risks. Current
assessments highlight inadequate facilities in labor camps, poor camp management, and inconsistent



                                               Page 26

                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



OHS practices. Worker awareness of codes of conduct and safety protocols is also low, increasing the
likelihood of non-compliance and unsafe practices. To mitigate these risks, Environmental, Social,
Health, and Safety (ESHS) clauses in contractor agreements must be strengthened and enforced.
Regular monthly inspections should be institutionalized to monitor compliance, with corrective action
measures applied promptly in cases of violations. This will help ensure that labor camps meet
minimum standards for worker welfare, safety, and hygiene, thereby reducing risks to both workers
and surrounding communities.

52. Migrant laborers, who make up nearly half the workforce, remain vulnerable and often lack
protection, raising risks of disputes with local communities. Stronger labor management and OHS
clauses in contracts, along with awareness of grievance mechanisms, are required to safeguard worker
welfare.

53. Dust Control and Hazardous Waste: Construction activities also generate noise, dust, and traffic
disruptions, which affect local communities. Mitigation measures such as signage, sound barriers,
automated misting systems, and air quality sensors should be applied to reduce these impacts. Dust
suppression measures remain inadequate. To address these gaps, site-specific dust control
measures—such as water spraying, covering stockpiles, and routine monitoring—must be
implemented. Hazardous waste should be segregated and prohibited from community reuse, with
strict disposal protocols to ensure safe handling.

54. Traffic and Community Safety: While canal rehabilitation works have not disrupted traffic flows,
which is a positive outcome. However, insufficient signage and a lack of proactive pedestrian safety
management along canal stretches remain concerns. A traffic and community safety plan should be
introduced to delineate work zones, schedule construction during off-peak hours, and provide safe
pedestrian crossings (where required). Routine dust suppression along traffic corridors will further
reduce community exposure to construction impacts.

55. Construction and Demolition (C&D) Waste: While waste collection and reuse by locals are
occurring, segregation and tracking are inconsistent, raising risks of unsafe reuse. There is also a
danger of C&D waste being burned by residents for cooking, which poses health hazards. To mitigate
these risks, strict enforcement of segregation protocols and logistical routes for safe disposal must be
established. Open burning should be prohibited, and third-party or joint inspections should be
conducted to ensure compliance.

Key gaps

56. Inconsistent PPE use, dust‑related traffic disruption, inadequate camp standards (WASH, safety,
lighting), vulnerable migrant labor, and community reuse of C&D waste pose E&S risks. Traffic control
for community safety (signage, work‑zone delineation, off‑peak scheduling) will be applied alongside
ESMP measures. See Core Principle 3 (Public & Worker Safety) for the detailed OHS/CHS diagnostics
and program‑wide controls (PPE, camp standards, dust suppression, traffic plans, inspections,
penalties).

3.2.4 CORE PRINCIPLE 4: LAND ACQUISITION AND RESETTLEMENT

Assessment of the existing systems

57. The program does not anticipate any land acquisition. The proposed project includes the
rehabilitation of existing channels and will use the existing alignment and existing government land.
In case of any land acquisition required, the Haryana Land Pooling Policy-2022 will be considered. In



                                               Page 27

                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



IWRD, any land acquisition and/or rehabilitation and resettlement (R&R) is undertaken following the
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition (RFCT LARR) Act, 2013, and Haryana
Land Pooling Policy-2022 by the Revenue/ Land Acquisition authorities. While the LARR Act 2013
emphasizes transparency, consent, and social impact assessments, the state’s R&R policy provided
additional benefits such as resettlement allowances, employment opportunities, and infrastructure
support, making it one of the more comprehensive state-level models for acquisition. The Haryana
Land Pooling Policy in 2022 marks a shift toward voluntary, partnership-based development. Instead
of compulsory acquisition, landowners contribute their land in controlled areas and receive developed
plots or a share in the project once infrastructure is built.

58. However, there are some legacy issues in very few cases where the landowners claim that the
existing right of way (RoW) of the canal passes through their land and therefore request compensation
– these being legacy issues often being very old when the canal was built and may be 30-70 years old,
and are being dealt with through the court for any compensation by the department.

59. The activity involving taking treated wastewater from existing STPs and transporting treated
wastewater (TWW) for irrigation to water-scarce areas through creating wastewater tanks at the
source and or destination and then transporting water through underground pipes along the road
alignments to the fields for supply, will use only government land or Panchayat lands for water tanks
and for the alignment of pipes along the road. While an MoU will be signed with the concerned
government department/ authorities and the panchayat for the use of land, no land acquisition or
resettlement is expected.

60. IWRD is also working towards reclaiming waterlogged areas in the region by planning to create
about 65 new water bodies requiring approx. 670 acres of panchayat land, which will serve as storage
and recharge structures. The land required for water deficit sites has already been identified. It is
proposed that only government and/ or panchayat land will be used for the construction of water
storage tanks/reservoirs, and an MoU will be signed with the concerned government department/
authorities and the panchayat for the use of land. No land acquisition or resettlement is expected.

61. In case of laying of underground pipeline for micro-irrigation and drainage, the Punjab Land
Improvement Schemes Act, 1963, as amended for Haryana in 2018, provides a legal framework for
laying, repairing, or renovating underground pipelines across private holdings. In case mutual
agreement cannot be reached, the District Level Committee is authorized to permit the State
Government or farmers to lay pipelines at least three feet below the surface along a demarcated line,
subject to compensation for any crop or structural damage, and the compensation amount, assessed
by the Committee, is binding on all parties, ensuring fairness and accountability. Importantly, while
the pipeline is restricted to irrigation use, the rights of landowners remain protected in the event of
future non-agricultural land use, balancing infrastructure development with property rights.

Key gaps

62. Although land acquisition is not anticipated due to the use of the existing canal alignment, it is
expected that water storage tanks and pipe alignments will be located solely on government or
Panchayat land. Nonetheless, comprehensive due diligence is required to ensure that the necessary
land is transferred or leased prior to the commencement of any works to facilitate proper project
implementation.




                                               Page 28

                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



3.2.5 CORE PRINCIPLE 5: RIGHTS AND INTERESTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLE

63. There is no Scheduled Tribe (ST) population in Haryana. However, the marginalized section of
society includes the Scheduled Caste (SC) and Backward Caste (BC), and women in general.

Assessment of the existing systems

64. Haryana’s reservation policy is designed to ensure equitable representation of marginalized and
disadvantaged groups in education and public employment, and applies across government jobs,
educational institutions, and even outsourced contractual employment. Scheduled Castes (SCs) are
provided with 20% reservation, reflecting the state’s commitment to addressing historical exclusion
and social inequities. Backward Classes are divided into two categories—BC-A and BC-B—based on
relative levels of social and educational backwardness. BC-A, considered the most disadvantaged
among backward classes, is granted 16% reservation, while BC-B receives 11%. In addition to caste-
based quotas, Haryana has adopted a 10% reservation for Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) from
the general category. This provision is intended to support families with annual incomes below ₹8 lakh
who do not fall under the SC or BC categories. While the framework is robust, its effectiveness
depends on awareness, monitoring, and institutional capacity to ensure genuine equity.

65. Haryana has introduced a range of policies and schemes aimed at supporting small and marginal
farmers, as well as vulnerable households, to strengthen agricultural sustainability and social equity.
These initiatives focus on easing access to modern technology, reducing environmental risks, and
promoting inclusive participation in state-led programs. Agricultural mechanization support and
subsidies are particularly important, as they enable smallholders to adopt improved machinery and
reduce dependence on manual labor, thereby enhancing productivity and lowering costs. The
Promotion of Agricultural Mechanization for In-Situ Management of Crop Residue and the Sub-
Mission on Agricultural Mechanization provide subsidies for machinery and village tool banks, while
the state plan scheme for Crop Residue Management incentivizes baling. Farmers receive ₹1,000 per
acre along with 70% subsidy on machinery to discourage stubble burning.

66. Programs such as the Promotion of Agricultural Mechanization for In-Situ Management of Crop
Residue and the Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization provide machinery support and subsidies
to Scheduled Caste (SC) households engaged in farming. Also, programs such as the horticultural
diversification scheme for SC farmers give a high subsidy (up to 90%) for SC farmers/ households.
Importantly, the beneficiary selection criteria for these programs are designed to include vulnerable
groups such as Below Poverty Line (BPL) families and SC households. This ensures that tenant farmers
and sharecroppers—often excluded from formal entitlements—are also covered.

67. The Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABHY) guidelines require special focus on the inclusion of SC, women, and
marginal farmers in Water User Groups. Selection of beneficiaries for micro-irrigation or other
schemes is done as per the Government of Haryana’s or Central Scheme (PMKSY-PDMC) eligibility
criteria, ensuring priority to BPL and small/marginal farmers. Under PDMC (Per Drop More Crop), the
subsidy rates are 55% for small & marginal farmers, and 45% for “other” farmers.

68. Women’s participation in WUAs remains a challenge and is often very nominal. Interaction with
WUAs during site visits suggests women are not represented in WUAs, and no activities have been
undertaken to promote gender equality.




                                               Page 29

                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Key gaps

69. In Haryana, WUA and Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) face significant institutional and
operational challenges that limit their effectiveness. Although WUAs are legally recognized under the
Haryana Registration and Regulation of Societies Act, 2012, they often lack genuine statutory powers
to enforce equitable water distribution or collect charges independently. Financial sustainability is a
major concern, as farmers or members are often asked to contribute cash for the repair and
maintenance of water channels. During the site visit, it was observed that even the contribution of 1%
of the construction cost to IWRD- MICADA for considering the reconstruction of water courses is
collected in cash, and there is no systematic mechanism for the collection or use of WUA bank
accounts. This raises social and equity concerns and weakens WUAs, increasing the risk of elite
capture, since larger farmers tend to dominate decision-making, marginalizing small and marginal
farmers. Additionally, participation by women is either absent or nominal in WUAs, and tenant
farmers or sharecroppers are often excluded from formal membership. Without enhanced capacity
building, financial independence, and gender-inclusive practices, WUAs risk becoming symbolic
institutions rather than true agents of participatory water governance.

3.2.6 CORE PRINCIPLE 6: SOCIAL CONFLICT

70. The program intervention does not exacerbate any social conflicts as it is working towards
enhancing irrigation efficiency and reclaiming waterlogged and salinity-affected areas, which can
boost crop productivity and farmers' incomes. It is not expected to cause social conflict or exclude any
groups based on caste, religion, or geography.

3.3   GENDER EQUALITY, SEA/SH, AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

71. Haryana has significantly advanced women’s representation by mandating 50% reservation for
women in Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)—Gram Panchayats, Panchayat Samitis, and Zila
Parishads—through the Haryana Panchayati Raj (Second Amendment) Act, 2020. This goes beyond
the national one-third quota, ensuring that nearly half of grassroots governance positions are held by
women.

72. Haryana’s policy framework for WUAs emphasizes participatory governance in irrigation
management, but unlike Panchayati Raj Institutions, it does not mandate a fixed quota for women’s
representation. WUAs are constituted under the Haryana Canal and Drainage Act, 1974, and further
strengthened by the Haryana Water Resources Authority Act, 2020, both of which encourage inclusive
membership. While under initiatives like the Jal Jeevan Mission, women are increasingly engaged in
WUAs through Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and Village Water & Sanitation Committees (VWSCs), and are
encouraged to take up roles in billing, collection of water charges, awareness campaigns, and even
aspects of operation and maintenance.

73. Despite these efforts, women’s participation in WUAs remains a challenge and is often very
nominal. Interaction with WUAs during site visits suggests women are not represented in WUAs, and
no activities have been undertaken to promote gender equality. However, mandating a reservation
for women and at least one executive position would strengthen inclusivity and ensure their
participation in O&M.

74. The Mahila Kisan Yojana is a Haryana government initiative launched by the Scheduled Castes
Finance and Development Corporation (HSCFDC) to economically empower Scheduled Caste (SC)
women by supporting self-employment in agriculture and allied sectors. It provides loans, subsidies,




                                               Page 30

                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                          ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



and margin money assistance for small-scale projects, ensuring that vulnerable women farmers can
access resources for sustainable livelihoods.

75. The issues of Sexual Exploitation & Abuse (SEA), Sexual Harassment (SH), and Gender-Based
Violence (GBV) are addressed within the framework of the Sexual Harassment of Women at
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 (POSH Act), and the Indian Penal Code
(IPC) and Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) provisions. This Act applies to all workplaces—including
government departments, field offices, and project sites—ensuring that women engaged in irrigation,
agriculture, and allied activities are legally protected against harassment and exploitation.

76. Both the IPC and BNS contain detailed provisions to address SEA/SH and GBV. The BNS largely
retains IPC provisions but reorganizes and strengthens punishments, ensuring continuity with
modernized language and higher penalties for aggravated offences. Offences such as sexual
harassment, voyeurism, stalking, and assault with intent to disrobe are grouped under Sections 63–
66, while rape and aggravated sexual offences are covered under Sections 75–79 with stricter
penalties under BNS. It also has provisions on cruelty by husband or relatives (Section 85), dowry death
(Section 86), and insulting the modesty of a woman (Section 138). These provisions provide for a wide
spectrum of sexual and gender-based offences, ensuring legal recourse and deterrence.

3.4   GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM

77. Grievances are handled through the CM window/Jan Samvad portal with department nodal
officers; see the Grievance Redressal Mechanism section for process and roles. In addition to the
online system, grievances can be filed manually with the Junior Engineer/ Sub-Divisional Officer,
escalated to Executive Engineer or higher authorities if unresolved. Similarly, the HFD also has a
mechanism of filing complaints with Range Office, Divisional Forest Officer (DFO) office, State Nodal
Officer, and through community meetings. Manual complaints can also be filed at Block and District
Agriculture offices for resolution.

78. The Jan Samvad grievance redressal mechanism in Haryana is a robust, technology-driven
platform that has significantly improved transparency and responsiveness in governance. It has
multiple channels to lodge grievances. Citizens can register grievances at Deputy Commissioner’s
offices (DCs office), Sub-Divisional Magistrate offices (SDM Office), CM’s residence, Haryana
Secretariat, e-Disha Kendras, or online via the CM Window/ Jan Samvad portal. The citizens get the
SMS on his/her mobile phone with the grievance registration number, which can be used for tracking
for grievance redressal online. CM Window is implemented at all Districts at e-Disha Kendras, and Sub-
Division Offices to get grievances from common citizens.

79. The departments have nodal officers/ GRM cell within their department for tracking and managing
grievances towards resolution, and filing an action taken report (ATR). Departmental GRM cells should
integrate automated reminders and track ATRs, with periodic analytics to identify recurrent issues and
systemic hotspots The GRM cell has its SOP and sends a reminder for early resolution. Also, the
reminder comes from CM Window for resolution. The grievances can be analyzed unit-wise or
irrigation circle wise, and at the individual level, and can be reported. Feedback is also taken from the
farmer/ complainant.




                                                Page 31

                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                                          ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



                       A Typical snapshot of Circle-wise and Unit-wise Report
                                        (As on 29-September 2025)




Key gaps

80. The system’s reliance on online platforms limits accessibility for citizens without internet access
or digital literacy. Introducing toll-free numbers would broaden its reach and ensure inclusivity.
Additionally, while grievances are logged and monitored, the absence of advanced data analytics
prevents the identification of recurrent issues and systemic hotspots. Enhancing analytical capabilities
would allow the government to move beyond case-by-case resolution and address root causes,
thereby improving service delivery and institutional performance.

81. No dedicated in-house grievance database integrating all schemes, and limited capacity at the
field level for proactive grievance analysis.

3.5   COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT

82. The mechanism of community engagement at IWRD and MICADA is through field interaction,
preparation of DPRs, and water security/ resource plans at the district and block level, IEC campaigns
under ABHY, along with farmer meetings, kisan melas, and field demonstrations used for direct
dissemination. Stakeholder feedback is also taken during public hearings for statutory clearances
where applicable. In addition, farmer and WUA trainings using HIRD on irrigation and agricultural
practices also provide an opportunity for community engagement.

83. Field officers (SE/XEN/SDO) regularly interact with Gram Panchayats, WUAs, and farmer groups
during canal closure meetings, water scheduling, and maintenance planning. Under Atal Bhujal Yojana
(ABHY), participatory water budgeting, IEC campaigns, and village-level meetings were held to co-
develop Water Security Plans. District Water Conservation Plans were prepared under the Jal Shakti
Abhiyan. The Integrated Water Resources Action Plan (2023-25) was prepared at the State Level by
merging the Block Water Resources Plans at the District level.

84. Trainings are being provided to farmers/ WUAs on topics like Participatory Irrigation, management
of crop diversification, benefit of micro irrigation, direct-seeded rice methodology, and Water
Conservation etc. MICADA, in collaboration with HIRD, Nilokheri has made significant strides in
capacity building and community engagement by organizing 44 Block-Level WUAs/Farmers Training
Programs and 6 in-house training sessions, empowering 2,159 and 487 participants, respectively.


                                                Page 32

                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Additionally, specialized training programs for Water User Associations (WUAs) were conducted at
HIRMI, alongside Gram Panchayat-level training across 1,647 Gram Panchayats under Atal Bhujal
Yojana. These initiatives focused on Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) and Water-Efficient
Practices, fostering a culture of water stewardship and sustainable agricultural practices at the
grassroots level.

85. The department's personnel—including Divisional Soil Conservation Officers, Deputy Directors of
Agriculture, Assistant Soil Conservation Officers, and their respective teams—maintain consistent
engagement with Gram Panchayats, Drainage Societies, Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), and
individual farmers to support the adoption of climate-smart agricultural practices. Additionally,
stakeholder and community interactions are facilitated by field officers from DAFW in collaboration
with Gram Panchayats, Water User Associations (WUAs), and drainage societies for both climate-
resilient agriculture and drainage initiatives. HFD may also ensure community involvement through
avenues such as Gram Sabhas, Panchayats, field-level meetings, public consultations, and partnerships
with non-governmental organizations during various phases of project planning, design, and
execution, if needed.




                                              Page 33

                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                                            ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



           4. CONSULTATIONS WITH KEY STAKEHOLDERS AND DISCLOSURE
4.1     STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION

4.1.1    STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION DURING PREPARATION OF THE ESSA

1. As a part of ESSA preparation, consultations were undertaken with key officials of IWRD, MICADA,
DAFW, and HFD, including the State Program Management Unit (SPMU); along with key officials from
HIRD and HIRMI.

2. Between September and early December 2025, multiple consultations were held with key
implementing agencies—IWRD, MICADA, DAFW and HFD to review project components such as canal
and water course rehabilitation, treated wastewater (TWW), waterlogging reclamation, micro-
irrigation, bio-drainage and sustainable agriculture, along with institutional such as DPR preparation
process, environmental and social risk management aspects, including the grievance redress
mechanism. Gender equality, community engagement processes, and learning from ABHY program
implementation. Discussions were also held with HIRMI on the training of WUAs.

3. Field visits to districts and consultations were also undertaken and included (1) visit to
rehabilitation works on water courses in Chirana (Sonipat) and alongside discussions with WUA
members and Panchayat representatives, (2) rehabilitation and repair work of Sirsa Branch channel at
Indri Head (Karnal) and discussions with contractor; (3) Consultations with farmers and field
functionaries of Agriculture Department at Urmi (Kurukshetra), (4) Visit to visits to Kahni village and
Ghilor Kalan villages (Rohtak) to see the functioning of Sub-surface and vertical drainage system and
interacted with farmers; (5) visit to canal based MI at Khachroli village in Jhajjar; and (6) Interaction
with district level officials from IWRD, MICADA, and Agricultural Department at site as well as in
Panchkula.

4. The details of visit and key discussion points is presented in the table below. The discussion details
and observations from the visit is presented in the Annexure-5.

Details of Site Visit           People Met                   Key Points Discussed
Rehabilitation work of Water    IWRD-XEN, SDO, MICADA        •   Process of water course rehabilitation
Courses (Under Construction     canal Patwari and Zildar;        planning and execution
site and Already Constructed    WUA members; Gram
                                                             •   Labor management during construction –
site), and interaction with     Panchayat Pradhan and
                                                                 OHS and CHS aspects
WUA in Village Chirana, Block   members, farmers in
Gohana, Sonipat.                general                      •   Warabandi system of distribution
                                                             •   WUA’s role in planning and execution, and
                                                                 in O&M
                                                             •   WUA’s institutional structure and
                                                                 functioning, including training and
                                                                 capacity building
                                                             •   WUA’s linkages with the Gram Panchayat
Rehabilitation of Irrigation    IWRD XEN, SDO, and other     •   Understanding canal rehabilitation work
Channel (Sirsa Branch) at       staff; Contractor and his
                                                             •   Desilting and ROW clearances – issues and
Indri Head (ongoing             staff
                                                                 challenges
work), District Karnal, and
interaction with Contractor                                  •   OHS and CHS aspects
                                                             •   Noise and dust pollution, vehicle
                                                                 movement, and traffic management
                                                             •   Labor management and labor camps



                                                  Page 34

                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                                                ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Details of Site Visit            People Met                      Key Points Discussed


Interaction with Farmers and Deputy Director,                    •   Challenges in agriculture
Gram Panchayat regarding Agriculture, Kurukshetra
                                                                 •   DSR benefits, issues, and challenges in
DSR, Crop-Diversification etc. ADOs, Agri culture
                                                                     adoption
in District Kurukshetra        Extension Workers,
                               farmers, Gram Panchayat           •   Cost-benefit with respect to transplanted
                               members etc.                          paddy
                                                                 •   Training and demonstration on DSR
                                                                 •   Impact on groundwater
                                                                 •   Key reforms required for larger adoption
                                                                     of DSR
Waterlogging site visit at       Divisional Soil Conservation    •   Both sub-surface and vertical drainage
Rohtak and the community         Officer, and District Soil          systems
Interaction - at Kahni village   Conservation Officer,
                                                                 •   Bio-drainage systems
and Ghilor Kalan villages        Rohtak, and DAFW staff;
(Rohtak) to see the              Farmers, members of the         •   Functioning of drainage system
functioning of Sub-surface       drainage committee              •   Impact due to sub-surface drainage
and vertical drainage system                                         system and benefit accrued to farmers
and interacted with farmers                                      •   Formation and functioning of drainage
                                                                     society
                                                                 •   Warabandi system of distribution
                                                                 •   O&M aspects of the drainage system
                                                                 •   Training and capacity building
Interaction with District        XEN – IWRD, XEN MICADA          •   Key challenges in the district with respect
Officers/Officials of IWRD,      Rohtak, Divisional                  to executing canal rehabilitation works
MICADA, and Agriculture          Agriculture Officer, DAO;
                                                                 •   Any land related issues
Department                       XEN MICADA Jhajjar
                                                                 •   OHS and CHS aspects
                                                                 •   Coordination with other departments
                                                                 •   Key challenges of waterlogging and
                                                                     salinity, and experience of schemes
                                                                     addressing them
                                                                 •   Training and capacity building of field
                                                                     functionaries on E&S aspects
MI Project site visit at         XEN MICADA Jhajjar; MI          •   MI system and its functioning
Chachrauli, Jhajjar              contractor; farmers;
                                                                 •   Warabandi system of distribution
                                 drainage society; Panchayat
                                 members                         •   Cost of managing the MI system on a day-
                                                                     to-day basis and future option for the
                                                                     drainage society
                                                                 •   Technical training and capacity building of
                                                                     drainage society on O&M and day-to-day
                                                                     management
                                                                 •   Linkages with Panchayat and making land
                                                                     available for MI project
                                                                 •   Key issues and challenges
                                                                 •   Potential replicability of the MI system




                                                    Page 35

                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



4.2   SUMMARY OF MULTI-STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION WORKSHOP

5. A multi-stakeholder workshop will be organized before the close of the Appraisal. It will cover
participants from all key stakeholder groups, including representatives from IWRD, MICADA, DAFW,
and HFD, other stakeholder departments/ agencies, including the Development and Panchayat
Department, PHED, State PCB, - HIRD and HIRMI, Haryana Wetlands Authority & Archaeology
Department, representatives from WUAs, and Drainage committees, civil society organizations,
academia, and beneficiary community groups; and district-level officials, among others. The purpose
of the workshop will be to seek feedback and suggestions on the draft ESSA findings and to gather
feedback and refine recommendations to strengthen environmental and social risk management and
sustainability. The ESSA will be revised/ updated considering the suggestions and feedback received
during the multi-stakeholder workshop and disclosed on the IWRD website.

4.3   DISCLOSURE

6. The draft ESSA will be publicly disclosed at the World Bank website and at the IWRD website
(including a translation of the Executive Summary in Hindi) to serve as the basis for discussion and
receipt of further feedback and comments for the multistakeholder consultation workshop. The draft
ESSA will be further revised based on feedback and comments, including from the multi-stakeholder
workshop. The Final ESSA will be redisclosed on the World Bank’s website and the IWRD website prior
to negotiations.




                                              Page 36

                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                                             ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



                              5. RECOMMENDATIONS AND ACTIONS
5.1       EXCLUSION OF HIGH-RISK ACTIVITIES

1. The Program will exclude activities that do not align with the World Bank policy on eligibility
requirements for PforR financing. The Program will not finance any high-risk activity that may have
significant adverse environmental and/or social risks/impacts, particularly associated with significant
land acquisition and resettlement, potential loss or conversion of natural habitats, significant pollution
or other significant externalities, and major changes in resource use. The exclusion criteria will be
applied to the packages/ subprojects that will lead to:

      a) Activities involving significant Land Acquisition (LA) and Physical Displacement of people
         residing/occupying such lands. Significant is defined as any LA for a single package that
         exceeds more than one percent of the land requirement of the total land required for the
         World Bank-financed Program.
      b) Activities that lead to significant conversion or degradation of critical habitats, key biodiversity
         areas, and forests, or important cultural heritage sites
      c) Activities causing significant air, water, or soil pollution, hazardous waste generation,
         procurement/application of banned agrochemicals/ pesticides.
      d) Activities that are non-compliant with central and state environmental and social legislations

5.2       SUMMARY OF IDENTIFIED GAPS

2. Although the implementing departments and agencies possess a comprehensive institutional
framework with clearly defined roles, responsibilities, systems, and processes, certain areas have been
identified that require further strengthening and alignment with the World Bank’s core principles. This
includes:

3. Core Principle 1: Program Environmental and Social (E&S) Management System

      •    E&S experts/nodal officers required in IWRD and Agriculture to manage E&S aspects. No
           departmental guidelines or SOPs for identifying and managing E&S risks.
      •    While some E&S clauses are included in the DPRs, bids, and contracts, there is no E&S risk
           screening and no system of including ESMPs with budgets and performance obligations by the
           contractors.
      •    Limited E&S training and capacity building modules/ opportunities/ programs for
           departmental staff and WUAs. E&S training conducted by HIRMI suffers from inconsistent
           training materials and relies mostly on retired departmental staff. The technical and
           institutional capacity for O&M functions of water courses and TWW-based micro-irrigation
           systems is low in WUAs.
      •    Absence of established guidelines or SOPs for WUAs concerning O&M, water allocation, and
           grievance redressal mechanisms.
      •    Farmers face weak market incentives to diversify crops, which discourages the adoption of
           more sustainable agricultural practices. There is limited focus on promoting IPM/INM with no
           annual scaling-up targets.

4. Core Principle 2: Natural Habitat and Physical and Cultural Resources

      •    Limited awareness and adoption of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and Integrated
           Nutrient Management (INM) measures.



                                                   Page 37

                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                                              ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



      •       Water quality assessments are currently limited to salinity and sodicity indicators, omitting
              the analysis of heavy metals (e.g., arsenic, lead, cadmium, chromium) and other contaminants
              that have potential implications for soil health, livestock, and human safety.

5. Core Principle 3: Public and Worker Safety

      •       Inconsistent PPE usage among laborers at different worksites.
      •       Limited enforcement of labor Camp standards for water, sanitation, hygiene (WASH), and
              safety. Site-specific emergency plans (e.g., for flooding or electrocution) are absent.

6. Core Principle 4: Land Acquisition and Resettlement

      •       No land acquisition is anticipated. However, some legacy issues exist where, in a small number
              of cases, landowners claim that the canal's existing right-of-way (RoW) passes through their
              land and request compensation. The land for water tanks/TWW infrastructure requires
              comprehensive due diligence and resolution to ensure the necessary land is transferred or
              leased before any work commences, facilitating proper implementation.

7. Core Principle 5: Rights and Interests of Indigenous People
   • There are no Scheduled Tribes (STs) in Haryana. However, there are other vulnerable groups
      requiring attention. For instance, participation by women is below 5% in WUAs, and tenant
      farmers or sharecroppers are often excluded from formal membership.

8. Core Principle 6: Social Conflict
   • The program is not expected to result in any social conflicts; however, a functional Grievance
      Regress Mechanism (GRM) is important with consolidated reporting. Currently, reliance on
      online GRM platforms limits accessibility for citizens without internet access or digital literacy.
      Also, the mechanisms of citizen feedback systems and disclosure protocols need to be
      strengthened in line with Atal Bhujal program.

5.3          RECOMMENDATIONS

9. The key recommendation to address the identified gaps includes as below:

       i.       Appoint/ depute/ designate focal E&S specialists in PMU and all PIUs (i.e. IWRD, MICADA,
                and DAFW)
      ii.       Draft WUA/ drainage society byelaws developed, defining their roles and responsibilities,
                financial powers, accountability, and integration of women in WUA executive committees
      iii.      Integration of E&S clauses, process for risk identification, and mitigation measures/ ESMP
                into DPRs, bidding documents, and civil works contracts
      iv.       Develop training modules on relevant E&S issues covering IWRD, MICADA, Agriculture
                Department, and WUA, such as on:
                   • Equitable/ participatory water management
                   • Agriculture emission management
                   • Efficient and sustainable use of natural resources
                   • O&M of TWW units, water courses, and micro-irrigation (MI) systems
                   • Upgraded package of practice for DSR and IPM/INM
                   • Training on field level implementation of DSR, including village level demonstration
                      plots, farmer field schools and hands-on guidance for risk mitigation
                   • Other relevant areas as necessary



                                                    Page 38

                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                                            ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



      v.      Plan and organize E&S capacity building opportunities for IWRD staff, consultants, and
              contractors for improved DPR preparation with ESMP, better monitoring, and enhanced
              implementation of civil works by contractors.
      vi.     Citizen feedback systems and disclosure protocols are developed and institutionalized at the
              community level following the Atal Bhujal Model.
   vii.       Strengthen GRM with toll-free number & analyze grievances to identify hotspots/ trends.
  viii.       Develop a consolidated GRM and Social Inclusion dashboard for IWRD and MICADA for
              regular monitoring and follow-up.
      ix.     Ensure fit-for-purpose quality standards & safeguards for TWW (following end-use–specific
              standards in line with global best practices e.g. EU Directive 2020/741, WHO guidelines, and
              Indian CPCB norms), monitoring, and safety protocols, and disclosure at TWW sites.
      x.      Assign annual targets for scaling up IPM/INM. And monitor IPM/INM adoption and pesticide
              and fertilizer consumption as part of DSR / crop diversification activities.
      xi.     Streamline subsidy payment processes against DSR and crop diversification in a timely
              manner, as payment delays hamper adoption and scaling up. Need to revise the POP for
              DSR/IPM with improved technical inputs and scale up demonstration plots across program
              areas.
   xii.       Invest in developing intensive IEC materials and activities to build farmer awareness and
              capacity for adoption of responsible agriculture practices.

5.4         E&S INPUT TO DLI/DLRS, AND PROGRAM ACTION PLAN

10. Based on the recommendations above, the following actions are proposed for inclusion in the
DLIs/ DLRs; and Program Action Plan to address the critical gaps identified between the Program
systems and PforR core principles. The remaining recommendations will be addressed through
inclusion in the Program Operations manual.

11. Input to DLI/DLRs: The following actions are proposed for inclusion in the DLI/ DLRs:

      •      DLR#1.4: Development of SOPs for WUAs and drainage societies covering participatory water
             management, and TWW reuse safety protocols in alignment with CPCB norms and protocols
             adopted under the Program.

      •      DLR#1.4: Embedding E&S clauses, screening requirements, and ESMP obligations into DPRs,
             bidding documents, and construction contracts

      •      DLR#1.5: Draft WUA byelaws defining their roles and responsibilities, financial powers and
             accountability, and integration of women in WUA executive committees including O&M.

12. Input to Program Action Plan: The following actions are proposed for inclusion in the Program
Action Plan (see the table below).




                                                  Page 39

                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)




  Action Description    Responsibility              Timing                   Completion Measurement

 Appoint, depute or     All              One time    Within one year     Government orders issued formally
 designate E&S focal    Implementing                 of Program          designating E&S focal points in
 points at the          Agencies                     effectiveness       IWRD units, MICADA and DAFW
 Executive Engineer
 level in each IWRD
 Unit, MICADA and
 DAFW
 Develop and            All              One time    Within two years    Approved guidelines and
 institutionalize       Implementing                 of Program          operational systems for citizen
 citizen feedback       Agencies                     effectiveness       feedback and disclosure established
 systems and                                                             at the community level
 disclosure protocols
 at the community
 level
 Develop training       All              One time    Within two years    Training modules on relevant E&S
 modules on key E&S     Implementing                 of Program          issues developed, approved and
 aspects for IWRD,      Agencies                     effectiveness       made available for use, consistent
 MICADA, DAFW and                                                        with ESSA recommendations,
 WUAs                                                                    including on Institutional and E&S
                                                                         aspects, PIM, O&M, TWW reuse,
                                                                         IPM/INM, natural resource
                                                                         management, including crop
                                                                         diversification, and DSR field
                                                                         implementation etc.

13. E&S Recommendations to be operationalized through Program Operations Manual (POM):
Additional ESSA actions will be operationalized through the Program Operations Manual (POM),
including:

     i.   Standardized screening checklists and ESMP templates as part of DPRs
    ii.   Strengthen GRM with toll-free number & analyze grievances to identify hotspots/ trends.
   iii.   Develop a consolidated GRM and Social Inclusion dashboard for IWRD and MICADA for
          regular monitoring and follow-up.
   iv.    WUA and Drainage Society capacity building on E&S aspects based on standard training
          modules developed under the Program including on themes: equitable/participatory water
          management; agriculture emission management; Efficient and sustainable use of natural
          resources; O&M of TWW units, water courses, and micro-irrigation (MI) systems; Upgraded
          package of practice for DSR and IPM/INM; Training on field level implementation of DSR,
          including village level demonstration plots, farmer field schools and hands-on guidance for
          risk mitigation; and other relevant areas as necessary.
    v.    Assign annual targets for scaling up IPM/INM. And monitor IPM/INM adoption and pesticide
          and fertilizer consumption as part of DSR / crop diversification activities.
   vi.    Revise the package of practices (POP) for DSR/IPM with improved technical inputs and scale
          up demonstration plots across program areas.
  vii.    Invest in developing intensive IEC materials and activities to build farmer awareness and
          capacity for adoption of responsible agriculture practices. and
  viii.   Enhanced water quality monitoring and disclosure




                                              Page 40

                                                                                                   Official Use Only
            ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)




ANNEXURES




  Page 41

                                                    Official Use Only
                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



        Annexure-1: Review of Applicable Legal and Regulatory Framework
1. The Government of India and the state government have enacted a range of laws, regulations,
and procedures relevant to managing the environmental and social effects of the proposed Program.
The following criteria were used to select the relevant legislation that best describes the country’s
system for managing the Program’s effects:
       i. environmental and social policies,
      ii. environmental and social protection laws, and
     iii. laws, regulations, or guidelines in the relevant sectors and subsectors that provide relevant
          rules or norms for environmental and social management

A. KEY LEGISLATION AND SCHEMES GUIDING THE PROGRAM

2. The Haryana Canal and Drainage Act, 1974, and Rules 1976. The Haryana Canal and Drainage Act,
1974, and its associated rules provide a legal framework for regulating irrigation, navigation, and
drainage in the state. The Haryana Canal and Drainage Act, 1974 (and further amendments) is a state
law that regulates the use of water for irrigation, navigation, and drainage in Haryana. It defines what
constitutes a "canal" and "drainage" work under the state's control and grants various powers to
government officials to manage these resources, such as prohibiting unauthorized installations,
regulating water supply, and acquiring land when necessary. The act applies to all government-
controlled canals, channels, reservoirs, drains, and structures, as well as government-maintained tube
wells and field drains. Key provisions include the government's authority to control water resources,
the appointment of officials to manage canals, the establishment of rules for water rates and usage,
compensation for damages, the prohibition of unauthorized structures, and procedures for land
acquisition and dispute resolution. The rules, like the Haryana Canal and Drainage Rules, 1976, detail
the day-to-day management and enforcement of the Act.

KEY ASPECTS OF THE ACT AND RULES:

3. Regulatory powers

    •   Water use: Grants the state government the power to use water from natural sources for
        canals and drainage works.
    •   Official appointments: Authorizes the State Government to appoint officers to manage canals
        and enforce the Act.
    •   Prohibitions: Prohibits unauthorized construction of canals, channels, or other works without
        government permission.
    •   Land acquisition: Includes provisions for the acquisition of land for canal and drainage
        purposes.

4. Management and operations

   •    Water supply: Establishes procedures for the supply of water, subject to conditions like crop-
        specific usage restrictions for sanitary reasons.
   •    Rates and charges: Outlines schemes for land rates and water charges based on usage and
        benefited areas.
   •    Watercourse maintenance: Addresses the responsibilities of individuals and groups who
        jointly construct or use a watercourse, including the recovery of costs for maintenance.
   •    Official oversight: Empowers various officers, such as the Divisional Canal Officer and
        Superintending Canal Officer, to make decisions and orders regarding canal operations and
        disputes.


                                               Page 42

                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)




5. Enforcement and penalties

   •    Offenses: Defines offenses for violations of the rules and specifies penalties.
   •    Dispute resolution: Provides a system for resolving disputes related to water supply and
        charges.
   •    Appeals: Establishes an appellate process for decisions made by officers, with the
        Superintending Canal Officer's order being final in some cases.
   •    Recovery of dues: Allows for the recovery of unpaid sums as arrears of land revenue.

6. The Act has been amended, notably in 1977, and the rules have been updated through
amendments like the one in 2018 to address new requirements, such as making demand statements
more accessible to villagers.

7. Haryana Water Resources (Conservation, Regulation and Management) Authority Act, 2020.
The Haryana Water Resources (Conservation, Regulation and Management) Authority Act, 2020,
established the Haryana Water Resources Authority (HWRA), a body responsible for managing and
regulating the state's ground and surface water resources. The Act mandates the conservation,
regulation, and management of water for "judicious, equitable and sustainable utilization". It allows
the state government to fix water usage rates, especially for industrial and commercial purposes. The
HWRA is also responsible for creating an Integrated Water Resources Plan for the entire state. Key
aspects of the Act include:

    •   Objective and Scope: To ensure the judicious, equitable, and sustainable use of Haryana's
        water resources through conservation, regulation, and management. The Act covers both
        groundwater and surface water within the state.
    •   Authority: It established the Haryana Water Resources (Conservation, Regulation and
        Management) Authority, which is a perpetual body with the power to own property and sue
        or be sued. The HWRA is to have a Chairperson and four members, with a Selection Committee
        making recommendations for their appointment.
    •   Rate Setting: The Act empowers the state government to fix rates for water usage, including
        for domestic, commercial, industrial, mining, and infrastructure projects.
    •   Planning: A key responsibility of the Authority is to develop an Integrated Water Resources
        Plan based on block-level water plans.
    •   Enforcement: The Act includes provisions for penalties for offenses, including fines and
        potential imprisonment, particularly for companies that violate the regulations.

8. The Haryana Water Resources (Conservation, Regulation and Management) Authority Act, 2020,
and its associated regulations allow for the establishment of Water Users' Associations (WUAs) to
manage water distribution at the local level, while the foundation of WUA comes from the Haryana
Canal and Drainage Act, 1974. The Act further specifies and expands upon the role of WUAs, giving
them more specific powers and responsibilities. It empowers WUA to manage water sharing
arrangements, maintain water accounts, prevent unauthorized irrigation, and assist in recovering
water charges.

9. The Punjab Land Improvement Schemes Act, 1963—as amended for Haryana in 2018—
empowers the Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare (DAFW) to implement underground
pipeline schemes and soil conservation measures. These provisions are directly aimed at tackling
waterlogging and salinity problems in Haryana by enabling reclamation works, drainage, and irrigation
improvements. At the national level, the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) and its Per




                                              Page 43

                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                                          ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Drop More Crop component promote micro‑irrigation, water harvesting, aquifer recharge, and reuse
of treated wastewater, integrating central and state investments for improved efficiency.

10. The Act specifically provides a legal framework for laying, repairing, or renovating underground
pipelines across private holdings when mutual agreement cannot be reached. In such cases, the
District Level Committee is authorized to permit the State Government or farmers to lay pipelines at
least three feet below the surface along a demarcated line, subject to compensation for any crop or
structural damage. The compensation amount, assessed by the Committee, is binding on all parties,
ensuring fairness and accountability. Importantly, while the pipeline is restricted to irrigation use, the
rights of landowners remain protected in the event of future nonagricultural land use, balancing
infrastructure development with property rights.

11. Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY). The Government of India launched the Pradhan
Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) on July 1, 2015, to improve irrigation and water use efficiency
in agriculture, using the motto "Har Khet ko Pani" (Water for every field) and "Per Drop More Crop".
Key activities include promoting micro-irrigation systems like drip and sprinkler irrigation, supporting
water storage and conservation, and integrating water source management with on-farm water use.
The major objective of PMKSY is to achieve convergence of investments in irrigation at the field level,
expand cultivable area under assured irrigation, improve on-farm water use efficiency to reduce
wastage of water, enhance the adoption of precision-irrigation and other water saving technologies,
enhance recharge of aquifers and introduce sustainable water conservation practices by exploring the
feasibility of reusing treated municipal waste water for peri-urban agriculture and attract greater
private investment in precision irrigation system. The scheme integrates ongoing initiatives such as
the Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Program (AIBP), Integrated Watershed Management Program
(IWMP), and On-Farm Water Management (OFWM), with responsibilities shared across the Ministries
of Agriculture, Water Resources, and Rural Development. These include activities ranging from
rainwater harvesting and farm ponds to canal construction, lift irrigation, and promotion of drip and
sprinkler systems.

12. The Per Drop More Crop component of PMKSY is a scheme focused on enhancing water use
efficiency in agriculture through micro-irrigation technologies like drip and sprinkler systems. Its main
objectives are to increase crop productivity and farmer income, promote water conservation and
water-saving technologies, and provide financial assistance for the installation of these systems. It
supports both micro-irrigation and other water management activities, such as water harvesting
structures, with financial assistance provided to farmers based on their landholding status. The
scheme also supports other activities like creating micro-level water storage and conservation
structures, such as farm ponds, and improving conveyance efficiency with water lifting devices.

B. RELEVANT NATIONAL AND STATE LEGISLATION

13. A summary of environmental and social laws, regulations, and policies that are relevant to the
thematic areas under the Program is mentioned below.

14. Canal rehabilitation, lining/relining, desilting, and minor widening

    a) Trigger conditions: Any works within existing canal right-of-way; tree felling required; works
       near wetlands or protected areas; in-channel works increasing turbidity; temporary traffic
       diversion.




                                                Page 44

                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



   b) Approvals/clearances; No EIA if no CCA expansion; Forest clearance if tree felling on forest
      land; Wetlands Authority clearance if within notified wetlands; local permits for traffic
      diversions as applicable.

   c) Responsible agencies: Implementer: IWRD; Clearances: HFD (forest), Wetlands Authority,
      district administration for traffic.

   d) Compliance checkpoints: Biodiversity/PCR screening completed before DPR finalization;
      turbidity controls and disposal site plan approved; C&D waste segregation plan; OHS/CHS
      plan; GRM info disclosed at site.

   e) Primary regulations
      • Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and subordinate standards for ambient and effluent
          controls.
      • EIA Notification, 2006 (and amendments): river valley/irrigation >10,000 ha CCA need
          prior EC; rehabilitation without capacity/CCA expansion generally exempt; any works
          in/near PAs or ecologically sensitive areas may trigger appraisal.
      • Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 for dust/noise controls at
          construction sites as mandated by SPCBs.
      • C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016 (as amended) for segregation, storage, transport,
          and disposal of construction debris, no open burning.
      • Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (for any diversion of forest land/trees in forest area;
          compensatory afforestation).
      • Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Rules, 2017 (screen and avoid impacts in
          notified wetlands/zone of influence).
      • Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 (permits if in/near PAs; species protection).
      • Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (chance finds;
          works near protected monuments

   f)   Standard clauses to embed
        o Chance find procedure (stop work, secure area, notify authority).
        o C&D Waste Rules compliance: segregation, licensed transporter, no open burning.
        o Turbidity control: silt curtains, settling basins; stop-work trigger if downstream NTU
            exceeds baseline by defined threshold.
        o OHS: mandatory PPE, trench safety, equipment guarding, first-aid and firefighting kits.
        o CHS: signage, fencing, traffic management; work scheduling to reduce community
            disruption.
        o Tree felling/compensatory plantation per Forest Act; riparian restoration with native
            species.

15. Treated Wastewater (TWW) reuse: conveyance, storage, and irrigation supply

   a) Trigger conditions: Use of STP effluent for irrigation; new storage tanks or pipelines; supply
      to food crops.

   b) Approvals/clearances: HSPCB consents/verification; compliance with CPCB irrigation reuse
      standards; land use permissions for tanks/alignments; MoU between IWRD/PHED/MICADA
      on roles.
   c) Responsible agencies: Implementer: IWRD (conveyance), PHED (STP performance);
      Oversight: HSPCB; Coordination: MICADA.




                                              Page 45

                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



   d) Compliance checkpoints: Baseline effluent testing at STP outlet and first irrigation node;
      NABL-certified lab validation; monthly monitoring for microbiological and heavy metals; crop
      restrictions documented; suspension triggers defined.

   e) Primary regulations/guidance
      • Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974: consents/oversight by SPCB on
          quality and conveyance.
      • CPCB “Guidelines for Utilization of Treated Effluent in Irrigation” (2019): irrigation reuse
          criteria including microbial and salinity parameters; monitoring and management plans.
      • CPHEEO Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment (2013, updated volumes) for
          operational good practice on reuse/safety

   f)   Standard clauses to embed
        No supply until three consecutive compliant test rounds meet CPCB irrigation standards.
        o Sampling SOP: frequency, parameters (BOD, COD, TSS, EC/TDS, pH, fecal coliform/E. coli,
            helminth eggs, heavy metals), locations.
        o Suspension protocol: immediate halt if any parameter exceeds limits; corrective action
            plan and retesting before restart.
        o Farmer IEC: safe application methods, crop restrictions (no raw-consumed crops),
            multiple-barrier guidance.
        o Sludge/solid by-product: handling per HSPCB rules; no application on food crops without
            compliance.

16. Saline drainage effluent from SSD/VD schemes and sump-trencher discharges

   a) Trigger conditions: Installation of subsurface or vertical drains; pumping to village
      drains/ponds; high EC/TDS effluent.

   b) Approvals/clearances: Discharge permissions where applicable; alignment approvals; NOCs
      from receiving body custodians; Wetlands screening if discharge may affect notified
      wetlands.

   c) Responsible agencies: Implementer: DAFW; Coordination: IWRD for outfall interfaces;
      Oversight: HSPCB for water quality compliance.

   d) Compliance checkpoints: Effluent EC/TDS thresholds set in DPR; routing to approved
      disposal sites; vegetated buffer strips/constructed wetlands where feasible; periodic
      monitoring of receiving water bodies.

   e) Primary regulations/guidance:
      • Water Act, 1974: control of water pollution; SPCB oversight on discharges to
          drains/ponds
          EP Act, 1986: enabling standards and directions for effluent/discharge management and
          receiving water protection
      • Wetlands Rules, 2017: screening to avoid discharge into notified wetlands; need
          permissions if hydrology affected

   f)   Standard clauses to embed
        o Effluent quality monitoring schedule and thresholds (e.g., EC, TDS, nitrates, phosphates).
        o Prohibition on discharge into drinking water sources and notified wetlands.
        o Maintenance of drainage networks (desilting, debris removal) pre- and post-monsoon.



                                              Page 46

                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



        o   Safety measures around open sumps/trenches (fencing, signage, lighting).

17. Bio-drainage plantations and afforestation (Excluded from the Program as per IWRD letter
dated 11 March 2026 to the PCCF, HFD, GoH)

   a) Trigger conditions: New plantations on farm/common lands; species selection; sites near
      sensitive habitats; overlap with SSD/VD assets.
   b) Approvals/clearances: Forest permissions for planting on forest lands; community consent
      on Panchayat/common lands; Wetlands screening where hydrology may be altered.
   c) Responsible agencies: Implementer: HFD; Coordination: IWRD/DAFW; Community:
      Panchayats/WUAs.
   d) Compliance checkpoints: Geotagging of plantation sites; GIS check to avoid co-location with
      SSD/VD; approved species list emphasizing native/local species; survival targets and
      maintenance plan.
   e) Primary regulations/guidance:
      • Indian Forest Act, 1927; Haryana Forest Rules (nursery/harvest/transport).
      • Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (if any forest land diversion for associated works).
      • EP Act, 1986 for habitat safeguards; Wetlands Rules where hydrology may be altered

   f)   Standard clauses to embed
        • Prohibit invasive species in sensitive areas; pilot-and-monitor approach with disclosure of
            results.
        o Harvest and residue management protocol (no burning; replanting schedules; stump
            treatment where required).
        o Worker OHS during planting/maintenance; camp standards where applicable.

18. Storage ponds/tanks and groundwater recharge structures on government/Panchayat land

   a) Trigger conditions: New construction on common lands; potential hydrological alterations;
      proximity to PCR/habitats; flood-prone areas.

   b) Approvals/clearances: Land transfer/possession documentation; community consent and
      resolutions; floodplain permissions if applicable; Wetlands screening.

   c) Responsible agencies: Implementer: IWRD; Community: Panchayats; Oversight: district
      administration/HSPCB if discharge/reuse is involved

   d) Compliance checkpoints: Site selection criteria applied (avoid critical habitats/PCRs); flood
      resilience and early warning integration; groundwater level baseline and post-recharge
      monitoring

   e) Primary regulations/guidance:
      • EP Act, 1986 for environmental safeguards in siting/design.
      • EIA Notification, 2006: most small storages on existing alignments are exempt unless
          part of larger schemes that trigger thresholds.
      • Wetlands Rules, 2017: avoid notified wetlands/zone of influence.
      • State water/irrigation laws (Haryana Canal and Drainage Act, 1974) for works and
          safety near canals/drains

   f)   Standard clauses to embed
        o Community engagement and disclosure of design and O&M responsibilities.



                                              Page 47

                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                        ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



        o   Safety measures (fencing, signage, controlled access).
        o   Emergency overflow routing and erosion control with native vegetation.

19. Labor management, camps, and worker/Community Health and Safety

   a) Trigger conditions: Use of contract/migrant labor; camps established; proximity to
      communities; machinery operations.

   b) Approvals/clearances: Registration and compliance under OSH Code/BOCW/Contract
      Labour; welfare cess; licenses where required.

   c) Responsible agencies: Implementer: All executing agencies through contractors; Oversight:
      labor departments; Supervision: PIUs.

   d) Compliance checkpoints: Camp standards for WASH, lighting, waste management; worker
      GRM; code of conduct; monthly OHS inspection reports; PPE compliance records.

   e) Primary regulations
      • Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions
          of Service) Act, 1996 and Cess Act for registration, welfare cess, facilities, OHS.
      • Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 for licensing and welfare
          provisions.
      • Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service)
          Act, 1979 (if relevant).
      • Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020 (consolidated
          code—use as overarching reference alongside legacy acts until fully
          notified/operationalized).
      • Air Act, 1981 for dust/noise controls; EP Act, 1986 for site directions.
      • Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules,
          2016 for oils/chemicals/asbestos if encountered

   f)   Standard clauses to embed
        o Mandatory PPE and training; penalties for non-compliance; incident reporting and
            corrective actions.
        o Worker GRM access, confidentiality, non-retaliation; toll-free hotline for grievances.
        o Community-facing CHS measures: traffic management, dust/noise control, work-hour
            restrictions.

20. Biodiversity and PCR screening

   a) Trigger conditions: Works near forests, wetlands, riparian zones, or culturally significant
      sites; excavation/earthworks.

   b) Approvals/clearances: Wetlands Authority, Forest/Wildlife permissions as applicable;
      Archaeology/heritage authority notifications for chance finds.

   c) Responsible agencies: Implementer: All executing agencies; Oversight: HFD/Wetlands
      Authority/Archaeology.




                                              Page 48

                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                                             ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



      d) Compliance checkpoints. Pre-DPR screening checklist; no-go zones mapped; chance find
         procedure in contracts; seasonal timing for works to avoid breeding/migration where
         relevant.
      e) Primary regulations
         • Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972; permissions/mitigation near PAs.
         • Wetlands Rules, 2017 for notified wetlands and buffers.
         • Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (if applicable to diversions).
         • AMASR Act, 1958 for chance finds and works near protected monuments

      g) Standard clauses to embed
         o Immediate stop-work and notify protocol for chance finds.
         o Habitat protection measures, riparian restoration with native species.
         o No work in notified wetlands/critical habitats unless approved mitigation and permits
             exist.

21. Equity in water distribution and hydraulic controls (head–tail)

      a) Trigger conditions: Lift irrigation potential; installation of flow measurement devices;
         updates to warabandi.

      b) Approvals/clearances: Internal approvals for device installation; community consultation via
         WUAs; data-sharing protocols

      c) Responsible agencies: Implementer: IWRD/MICADA; Governance: WUAs; Oversight:
         HWRA/IWRD.

      d) Compliance checkpoints. Calibrated weirs/flow meters installed; tamper-proofing; periodic
         audits; equity KPIs tracked (tail reliability, hours of supply).

      e) Standard clauses to embed: Device security and audit requirements; publication of equity
         KPIs; corrective actions for persistent inequity.

      f)    Primary regulations/guidance:
            • Haryana Canal and Drainage Act, 1974 and rules for canal operations and controls
                (warabandi, measured delivery).
            • Haryana Water Resources (Conservation, Regulation and Management) Authority Act,
                2020 for groundwater regulation and allocation where relevant.

C. Relevant National and State Legislation

22. A summary of environmental and social laws, regulations, and policies that are relevant to the
Program are listed in the tables below.

 Sl.       Applicable Act/                                                      Relevance to the Program
                                Objective and Provisions
 No.       Regulation/ Policy                                                   and Key Findings
Social
  1        Maternity Benefit    Regulates employment of women for certain       Safeguards the interest of
           Act, 1961            period before and after childbirth and provides female personnel engaged
                                for maternity benefit in establishments         under the Program




                                                   Page 49

                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                                              ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Sl.   Applicable Act/                                                            Relevance to the Program
                               Objective and Provisions
No.   Regulation/ Policy                                                         and Key Findings
 2    Sexual Harassment        Provides guidance on redressal against sexual     Legal protection to project
      of Women at              harassment complaints, including its internal     employees against SEA/SH at
      Workplace                investigation in a time-bound manner              the workplace
      (Prevention,
      Prohibition and
      Redressal) Act, 2013
 3    Rights of Persons        Provides for non-discrimination in public         Infrastructure planning must
      with Disabilities Act,   spaces including transport and built              adhere to universal design
      2016                     environment                                       principles, ensuring
                                                                                 accessibility for all.
 4    Haryana Reservation Provides reservation for marginalized groups           Opportunities for the
      Policy              such as SC, BC, and economically backward              vulnerable and safeguards
                          persons in employment and                              against discrimination at the
                          educational/technical/professional institutions        workplace
 5    Haryana Land             This promotes planned development and             It is relevant if land is
      Pooling Policy-2022      voluntary participation of landowners as          required for physical
                               partners in development and offers developed      infrastructure development,
                               plots or partnerships in urban infrastructure     such as for irrigation and
                               projects                                          drainage infrastructure,
                                                                                 offline storage capacity, or a
                                                                                 Centre of Excellence
 6    Haryana Municipal        This act protects the rights of street vendors    It could be relevant if any civil
      Street Vendors                                                             works or infrastructure
      (Protection of                                                             development activities
      Livelihood and                                                             temporarily or permanently
      Regulation of Street                                                       affect street vendors.
      Vending) Act, 2014
 7    Right to Information     This act provides a framework for citizens to     Relevant
      Act, 2005                access information from public authorities,
                               promoting transparency and public
                               engagement.

Environmental
Sl.no Policy                                Department Relevance
 1    Environmental Impact                  IWRD,          River valley/irrigation projects require
      Assessment (EIA) Notification,        MICADA,        environmental clearance (>10,000 ha CCA by
      2006 (and amendments)                 HFD            MoEFCC; ≤10,000 ha by SEIAA);
                                                           rehab/modernization without CCA expansion is
                                                           typically exempt, but any expansion of
                                                           CCA/capacity or works in/near PAs/wetlands trigger
                                                           appraisal.
 2    State guidance for minor              IWRD,          Minor irrigation schemes under 2,000 ha may
      irrigation (<2,000 ha CCA)            MICADA         proceed based on verified groundwater availability
                                                           without separate EIA, subject to State
                                                           environmental authority verification
 3    Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980       IWRD, HFD      Diversion of forest land for non-forest use (e.g.,
                                                           canal works, storage structures, check dams)
                                                           requires prior central approval and compensatory
                                                           measures.




                                                    Page 50

                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                                           ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



4    Indian Forest Act, 1927 and         HFD          Governs plantations, nursery operations,
     Haryana Forest Rules                             harvesting, residue management, and transport of
                                                      forest produce for bio-drainage and afforestation.

5    Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972     IWRD, HFD,   Works in/adjacent to sanctuaries or habitats of
                                         MICADA       scheduled species require permits; expansion of
                                                      canals into protected areas may require EIA and
                                                      strict controls.
6    Wetlands (Conservation and          IWRD, HFD,   Regulates activities in notified wetlands; site
     Management) Rules, 2017;            MICADA       screening and approvals are required for canal
     Wetland Authority of Haryana                     rehab, plantations, or check dams that may alter
                                                      wetland hydrology.
7    Environment (Protection) Act,       IWRD,        Framework law for environmental standards;
     1986                                MICADA,      applicable to TWW quality for irrigation, effluent
                                         DAFW, HFD    from drainage works, and any prescribed
                                                      environmental safeguards.
8    Water (Prevention and Control of    IWRD,        Requires compliance with discharge and reuse
     Pollution) Act, 1974                MICADA,      standards and consents as applicable for TWW
                                         DAFW         conveyance/use and drainage outfalls.

9    CPCB irrigation reuse standards;    IWRD,        Sets treated wastewater quality criteria for safe
     NABL-validated monitoring           MICADA       agricultural reuse; necessitates pre-discharge
                                                      testing, routine monitoring, and suspension triggers
                                                      for non-compliance.
10   PMKSY - Modernization of CAD & MICADA,           Technical/operational framework for command
     Water Management (M-CADWM) IWRD                  area development, solar pumping, underground
     Guidelines                                       pipelines, hydrants, and micro‑irrigation O&M.
11   Punjab Land Improvement             DAFW         Legal basis to plan and execute land-improvement
     Schemes Act, 1963 (as                            schemes (vertical/subsurface drainage,
     adopted/amended by Haryana)                      sumps/trenchers), secure NOCs, resolve disputes,
                                                      and recover costs.
12   Haryana Canal and Drainage Act,     DAFW,        Governs construction, maintenance, and operation
     1974                                IWRD         of irrigation and drainage works, including
                                                      alignments and outfalls relevant to drainage
                                                      management.
13   Haryana Water Resources         DAFW,            Regulates groundwater allocation and
     (Conservation, Regulation and   IWRD             conservation; relevant for tubewell operations in
     Management) Authority Act, 2020                  over-exploited blocks and recharge planning.
14   Insecticides Act, 1968 and Rules;   DAFW         Regulates pesticide use, training, and safe
     IPM Guidelines                                   handling; underpins IPM and runoff controls to
                                                      protect water quality.
15   Fertilizer (Control) Order; Soil    DAFW         Provides standards and advisory framework for
     Health Card Guidelines                           nutrient management and site-specific fertilizer
                                                      application.
16   Building and Other Construction     IWRD,        Mandates registration, welfare cess, and worker
     Workers (RE&CS) Act, 1996           MICADA,      facilities/OHS for construction activities (canals,
                                         DAFW, HFD    watercourses, drainage, plantations, support
                                                      structures).




                                                 Page 51

                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                                       ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



17   Contract Labour (Regulation and    IWRD,       Regulates engagement of contract and migrant
     Abolition) Act, 1970 (and          MICADA,     labor; requires licenses, welfare provisions, and
                                        DAFW        adherence to OHS clauses in contracts.

18   Occupational Safety, Health and    IWRD,       Consolidates 13 central labour/OHS laws (incl.
     Working Conditions (OSH) Code,     MICADA,     BOCW, Contract Labour, ISMW, etc.) into a single
     2020                               DAFW, HFD   framework; sets employer duties for safe
                                                    workplaces, welfare facilities, working
                                                    hours/overtime, and provisions for contract and
                                                    inter-state migrant workers. Applicable across
                                                    construction and operations.
19   The Ancient Monuments and          IWRD,       Establishes a legal frameworks for preserving
     Archaeological Sites and Remains   MICADA,     ancient monuments and archaeological sites of
     Act, 1958                          DAFW, HFD   national importance. It empowers
                                                    the Archaeological Survey of India to protect these
                                                    sites, regulate archaeological excavations, and
                                                    enforce strict construction bans within 100 meters
                                                    of protected structures




                                             Page 52

                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                                                     ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



        Annexure-2: Comparison of Borrower’s System Against Core Principles

CORE PRINCIPLE 1: PROGRAM E&S MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

1. This principle ensures that programs promote E&S sustainability by systematically identifying and
managing E&S risks. The underlying planning elements, an assessment of the relevant Program’s system, and
identified gaps are given in Table below.

Key Planning            Assessment                            Gaps/Actions
Elements
1. Operate within an    Haryana operates under                DPRs and contracts do not consistently embed
adequate legal and      comprehensive national/state E&S      statutory requirements (e.g., C&D, OHS,
regulatory              laws; implementation capacity and     Wetlands/PCR).
framework to guide      enforcement vary by agency and
E&S impact              site.                                 Action: Adopt a Program-wide legal compliance
assessments,                                                  checklist can be adopted. This checklist will
mitigation,                                                   require permit/clearance evidence before bid
management, and                                               issue and before site mobilization. ESMP should
monitoring at the                                             be integrated and supervision checklists in DPRs
PforR Program level.                                          and contracts can be included.
2. Incorporate          Pre-screening occurs with water       No standardized screening tools; habitat/PCR,
recognized elements     quality and soil health tests being   wetlands, and groundwater stress not consistently
of good practice in     conducted.                            flagged; GRM access gaps for vulnerable groups.
E&S assessment and                                            Reuse of C&D waste by community is potentially
management,                                                   hazardous.
including early
screening of                                                  Action: Introduce standardized E&S screening
potential impacts.                                            checklists at concept/DPR stage, covering
                                                              habitats/PCR, wetlands, flood risk, land/common-
                                                              use, groundwater blocks, effluent/TWW,
                                                              OHS/CHS, labor camps, C&D disposal and GRM
                                                              access.
3. Incorporate          Alternatives like bio-drainage vs     Analysis must be conducted to determine trends
recognized elements     SSD/VD, canal lining options, TWW     and flag hotspots. Cumulative water demand
of good practice in     vs freshwater supply, site choices    implications such as command area expansion
E&S assessment and      for storage/recharge are being        must be assessed.
management,             discussed but not documented
including               consistently in DPRs.                 Action: Conduct analytics and determine
consideration of                                              alternatives such as project sites for groundwater
strategic, technical,                                         recharge, canal lining, and lifecycle O&M
and site alternatives                                         implications.
(including the ‘no
action’ alternative).
4. Explicit             Induced command-area expansion        Water budget and pesticide/nutrient load analysis
assessment of           and post-reclamation                  is required.
potential induced,      intensification could raise water
cumulative, and         demand, pesticide/fertilizer use,     Action: Add cumulative impact section in DPRs,
transboundary           and salinity disposal loads;          determine pesticide and nutrient load trends,
impacts                 transboundary risks are limited but   monitoring plans with SCADA and RTDAs.
                        basin allocations affect supply.

5. Identification of ESMPs not consistently prepared;         Missing ESMP templates and SOPS. Limited
measures to mitigate OHS/CHS, dust/noise,                     analytics to determine trends and flag hotspots.
adverse E&S risks    C&D/hazardous waste, TWW



                                                        Page 53

                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                                     ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



and impacts that        suspension triggers, saline           Action: Mandate site-specific ESMPs and include
cannot be otherwise     discharge routing need                clauses for OHS, C&D waste, TWW reuse and SOPs
avoided or              codification.                         with suspension triggers. Saline effluent disposal,
minimized                                                     biodiversity/PCR protection must also be included.
6. Responsiveness       Multiple grievance channels exist     Toll-free number missing and a lack of data
and accountability      (CM window, Jal Samvad, social        analytics of GRM.
through stakeholder     media); 30-day resolution target;
consultation, timely    but no toll-free access and limited   Action: Launch Toll free number and standardize
dissemination of the    analytics; WUA and vulnerable         complaints. Publish semi-annual E&S summaries
PforR information,      group outreach weak.                  and GRM. Target outreach to women and
and responsive                                                vulnerable communities.
GRMs.

CORE PRINCIPLE 2: NATURAL HABITAT AND PHYSICAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES

2. Core Principle 2 focuses on protecting natural habitats and cultural resources, ensuring that programs
avoid or mitigate damage to ecologically sensitive areas and valuable cultural sites. The underlying planning
principles, an assessment of the relevant Program’s system, and identified gaps are given in Table below.

Key Planning Elements                Assessment               Gaps/Actions
1. Identify and screen for adverse   Canal rehab/desilting,   No standardized habitat/PCR screening or
effects on potentially important     drainage (SSD/VD), 65    mapped no-go zones. Chance-find not
biodiversity and cultural resource   new storages, and        embedded in contracts and there is limited
areas and provide adequate           bio-drainage may         turbidity monitoring. Disposal sites for C&D
measures to avoid, minimize, or      convert or fragment      have not been pre- approved.
mitigate adverse effects.            riparian habitat,
                                     disturb aquatic          Actions: A screening checklist can be adopted
                                     ecosystems, and alter    for the DPRs that include wetlands, riparian
                                     local hydrology.         zones, protected areas and PCRs. Critical habitat
                                     “Waterlogged” areas      can be mapped and excluded and chance find
                                     could be natural         procedures can be included. Stop-work triggers
                                     wetlands and this        in cases of excessive turbidity and disposal sites
                                     needs to be              away from community settlements/PCR/critical
                                     confirmed. In            habitat can be identified.
                                     addition, PCR risks
                                     exist during
                                     earthworks.
2. Support and promote the           Civil works can raise    No fish rescue protocols, revegetation plans, or
protection, conservation,            turbidity and affect     ecological monitoring. Pilots to determine
maintenance, and rehabilitation of   aquatic ecosystems.      appropriate species for bio-drainage must also
natural habitats.                    Riparian vegetation      be identified.
                                     removal occurs during
                                     canal modernization.     Actions: Require native vegetation to be grown
                                     Drainage discharges      in riparian areas, create fish rescues/relocation
                                     may degrade water        protocols, combine water quality with bio-
                                     bodies/ nearby           indicators. Implement vegetated buffer strips
                                     habitat.                 and constructed wetlands to treat drainage
                                                              discharge. Bio-drainage species should also be
                                                              screened for ecological compatibility, drainage
                                                              efficacy and economic value for farmers.
3. Avoid significant conversion or   Certain “waterlogged” There is no formal register for critical habitat
degradation of critical natural      sites could be notified that will include no-go zones. Compensatory
habitats. If avoiding significant    wetlands or critical    afforestation is creating issues for contractor.
conversion of natural habitats is    habitats.



                                                        Page 54

                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                                       ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Key Planning Elements                 Assessment               Gaps/Actions
not technically feasible, include     Storages/recharge        Action: Define and disclose critical habitats.
measures to mitigate or offset the    structures on            Require screening from the wetland authority of
adverse impacts of the PforR          common lands may         Haryana to ensure wetlands are not being
Program activities.                   alter hydrology.         impacted. If there is unavoidable habitat loss,
                                      Bio-drainage scale       then compensatory afforestation and
                                      could shift water        revegetation measures must be applied.
                                      balance.
4. Take into account potential        Earthworks for canal     Chance find procedures are not formalized. PCR
adverse effects on physical           rehab, storage, and      screening is not in DPRs.
cultural property and provide         drainage trenches
adequate measures to avoid,           may encounter            Action: Insert PCR screening into DPRs.
minimize, or mitigate such effects.   chance finds.

CORE PRINCIPLE 3: PUBLIC AND WORKER SAFETY

3. This principle addresses the need to protect public health and worker safety, particularly in relation to
infrastructure projects and activities involving hazardous materials or processes. The underlying planning
principles, an assessment of the relevant Program’s system, and identified gaps are given in Table below.

      Key Planning Elements                    Assessment                                Gaps/Actions
1. Promote adequate community,        Construction along               Inconsistent PPE usage, uncontrolled community
individual, and worker health,        canals/watercourses uses         reuse of C&D. Limited flood/monsoon SOPs and
safety, and security through the      contract and migrant labor.      early warning systems.
safe design, construction,            PPE compliance was seen to
operation, and maintenance of         be inconsistent, dust/noise      Actions: Enforce PPE, trench/electrical safety;
program activities. While carrying    and traffic risks near           monthly OHS inspections with corrective actions;
out activities that may be            communities. Labor camps         minimum camp standards (WASH, lighting,
dependent on existing                 vary in WASH/safety and          waste, firefighting); site traffic plans, signage,
infrastructure, incorporate safety    there is reuse of C&D waste      pedestrian safety and dust suppression; prohibit
measures, inspections, or remedial    by community. Equity risks       unsafe community reuse/open burning of C&D;
works as appropriate. Promote         from uncontrolled lift           device security for flow meters/weirs;
measures to address child and         irrigation; flood-season risks   flood/monsoon SOPs and early warning; zero
forced labor.                                                          tolerance in contracts for child/forced labor;
                                                                       worker GRM with toll-free access.
2. Promote the use of recognized      Hazardous streams include        No hazardous waste register, no screening for
good practice in the production,      used oils/grease,                asbestos in demolition/renovation and no
management, storage, transport,       paints/solvents, batteries/e-    arrangements for e-waste recycling.
and disposal of hazardous             waste; possible asbestos in
materials generated under the         legacy structures; saline        Actions: Establish a register for hazardous
PforR.                                drainage effluent can carry      materials, screen materials for asbestos,
                                      nutrients/chemicals.             implement e-waste collection measures and
                                                                       maintain a collection and disposal record.
3. Promote the use of integrated      DSR and intensification could A lack of INM and IPM integration into farming
pest management practices to          increase pesticide use;       and insufficient phytoremediation measures to
manage or reduce the adverse          runoff may impact water       treat runoff.
impacts of pests or disease           bodies and health.
vectors.                                                            Actions: Adopt IPM and INM. Do IEC activities for
                                                                    farmers to teach them the benefits of integrating
                                                                    these measures along with technical capacity.
                                                                    Establish vegetated buffers.




                                                        Page 55

                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                                     ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



      Key Planning Elements                    Assessment                               Gaps/Actions
4. Provide training for workers       Training is uneven on safety   A lack of training modules with inconsistent
involved in the production,           measures.                      materials. Limited emergency preparedness
procurement, storage, transport,                                     measures.
use, and disposal of hazardous
chemicals in accordance with the                                     Actions: Standardize training and create
relevant international guidelines                                    templates. Run period drills and refresher
and conventions.                                                     courses.
5. Include adequate measures to       Monsoon flooding leading to    There is an absence of emergency
avoid, minimize, or mitigate          canal overflows will occur.    response/action plans. A lack of early warning
community, individual, and worker     There are heat stress risks    system integration with inadequate safety
risks when the PforR Program          and community exposure         protocols. There is a lack of incident reporting as
activities are located in areas       near works.                    well.
prone to natural hazards such as
floods, hurricanes, earthquakes, or                                  Actions: Prepare site-specific emergency
other severe weather or affected                                     response plans, integrate early warning systems,
by climate events.                                                   schedule desilting, implement trench safety,
                                                                     electrocution prevention measures, and SOPs for
                                                                     heat stress.

CORE PRINCIPLE 4: LAND ACQUISITION AND RESETTLEMENT

4. This principle addresses the need for management of Program E&S systems for LA and loss of access to
natural resources in a way that avoids or minimizes displacement and assists affected people in improving, or
at the minimum restoring, their livelihoods and living standards. The underlying planning principles, an
assessment of the relevant Program’s system, and identified gaps are given in Table below.

Key Planning Elements                     Assessment                            Gaps/Actions
1. Avoid or minimize LA and related       Not applicable as no land would be    E&S screening to ensure this.
adverse impacts.                          acquired.                             Also, any significant land
2. Identify and address economic or       Any land acquisition required, it     acquisition or resettlement will
social impacts caused by LA or loss of    follows the Right to Fair             be excluded from program
access to natural resources, including    Compensation and Transparency in      activity.
those affecting people who may lack       Land Acquisition Act, 2013, and
full legal rights to resources they use   Haryana Land Pooling Policy-2022
or occupy.                                by the Revenue/ Land Acquisition
                                          authorities.
3. Provide compensation sufficient to
                                          While the LARR Act 2013
purchase replacement assets of
                                          emphasizes transparency, consent,
equivalent value and to meet any
                                          and social impact assessments, the
necessary transitional expenses, paid
                                          state’s R&R policy provided
before taking land or restricting
                                          additional benefits such as
access.
                                          resettlement allowances,
4. Provide supplemental livelihood        employment opportunities, and
improvement or restoration                infrastructure support, making it
measures if taking of land causes loss    one of the more comprehensive
of income-generating opportunity          state-level models for acquisition.
(e.g., loss of crop production or         The Haryana Land Pooling Policy in
employment).                              2022 marks a shift toward
5. Restore or replace public              voluntary, partnership-based
infrastructure and community              development. Instead of
services that may be adversely            compulsory acquisition, landowners
affected by the Program.                  contribute their land in controlled




                                                        Page 56

                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                                    ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Key Planning Elements                    Assessment                           Gaps/Actions
6. Include measures in order for LA      areas and receive developed plots
and related activities to be planned     or a share in the project once
and implemented with appropriate         infrastructure is built.
disclosure of information,
consultation, and informed
participation of those affected.

CORE PRINCIPLE 5: RIGHTS AND INTERESTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLE

5. This principle addresses the need to give due consideration to the cultural appropriateness of, and
equitable access to, Program benefits, giving special attention to the rights and interests of Indigenous
Peoples, and the needs or concerns of vulnerable groups. The underlying planning principles, an assessment
of the relevant Program’s system, and identified gaps are given in Table below.

      Key Planning Elements                            Assessment                           Gaps/Actions
1. Undertake meaningful                There is no indigenous population (Scheduled Requires proper
consultations if the Indigenous        Tribe) in Haryana.                           guidelines and SOPs for
Peoples groups are potentially                                                      community
affected (positively or negatively),   However, provisions for consultation and     engagement.
to determine whether there is a        engagement with the community are built in
broad community support for the        through WUA and farmer engagements,
PforR Program activities.
2. Ensure that Indigenous Peoples
can participate in devising
opportunities to benefit from
exploitation of customary
resources and indigenous
knowledge, the latter (indigenous
knowledge) to include the consent
of Indigenous Peoples.
3. Give attention to groups            Haryana’s reservation policy is designed to     There are no
vulnerable to hardship or              ensure equitable representation of              reservations for women
discrimination, including, as          marginalized and disadvantaged groups and       in WUA and no
relevant, the poor, the disabled,      provides for 20% reservation for SCs, and       guidelines/ SOP for the
women and children, the elderly,       16% reservation for BC-A, 11% for BC-B          same.
ethnic minorities, racial groups, or   categories. Also, Haryana has adopted a 10%
other marginalized groups;             reservation for Economically Weaker Sections
and if necessary, take special         (EWS) from the general category with annual
measures to promote equitable          incomes below ₹8 lakh and who do not fall
access to PforR Program benefits.      under the SC or BC categories.
                                       Also, it has range of policies and schemes
                                       aimed at supporting small and marginal
                                       farmers, as well as vulnerable households.



CORE PRINCIPLE 6: SOCIAL CONFLICT

5. This principle addresses the need to avoid exacerbating social conflict, especially in fragile states, post-
conflict areas, or areas subject to territorial disputes. The underlying planning principles, an assessment of the
relevant Program’s system, and identified gaps are given in Table A9.

Key Planning Elements Assessment                                                      Gaps/Actions



                                                       Page 57

                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                                   ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



1. Consider conflict    The program intervention does not exacerbate any           No Gaps
risks, including        social conflicts as it is working towards enhancing
distributional equity   irrigation efficiency and reclaiming waterlogged and
and cultural            salinity-affected areas, which can boost crop
sensitivities.          productivity and farmers' incomes. It is not expected to
                        cause social conflict or exclude any groups based on
                        caste, religion, or geography.




                                                     Page 58

                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                                             ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



  Annexure-3: Strengthening E&S Clauses in the Bidding and Contract Documents
1. Purpose and scope This Annexure defines the minimum Environmental, Social, Health and Safety (ESHS)
requirements to embed in the procurement process and contract conditions for works consistent with national
regulations and the core six principles.

2. The E&S clauses should include the following:

   •   Preliminary ESHS plan and methodology for managing E&S risks (preliminary Contractor ESMP
       principles) and all related costs included in the bid.
   •   Contractors must have an ESMP that includes OHS, traffic, waste, camp and emergency response plans
   •   Draft Code of Conduct covering ESHS, OHS, SEA/SH and Violence Against Children; signature
       acknowledgment by all personnel; posting on site and in community-accessible areas
   •   SEA/SH Prevention and Response Action Plan implementation arrangements, including survivor-
       centered referral pathways and confidential reporting to the GM.
   •   Include mandatory ESHS/OHS/SEA/SH induction for all workers prior to work.
   •   Require E&S specialists and, where risks are substantial or high, a SEA/SH expert with relevant
       experience, specify minimum qualifications and years of experience in Employer’s Requirements.
   •   Ensure GRM for workers and communities.

3. Contractors obligations/compliances must include the following:

   •   Comply with all applicable national and state laws and regulations including permits and licenses.
   •   Pollution control standards for air, noise, water and soil.
   •   C&D waste rules 2016 with amendments.
   •   Comply with the Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020; Building and Other
       Construction Workers Act, 1996
   •   Prohibit child/forced labor; comply with Contract Labor Act, 1970 and Inter-State Migrant Workmen
       Act, 1979.
   •   Maintain worker contracts/records; timely wages; non-discrimination; adequate camp WASH,
       lighting, waste, and fire safety.
   •   Operate worker and community GRMs: accessible channels (including toll-free hotline),
       confidentiality, non-retaliation, acknowledgment within 3 days, resolution within 30 days; display
       GRM information in Hindi/local language; targeted outreach to vulnerable groups (e.g., migrant
       workers).
   •   Implement a chance finds procedure: stop work, secure area, notify Engineer and competent
       authority; resume only upon clearance. Applicable law: Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
       and Remains Act, 1958.

4. Monitoring & Reporting

   •   Monthly E&S report: CESMP implementation; workforce/training; incidents/near-misses and
       corrective actions; OHS inspections; waste manifests; TWW monitoring data; permits/compliance
       checks; GRM statistics.
   •   Permit evidence: provide required environmental/occupational permits before bid award (as
       applicable) and prior to mobilization; maintain copies on site.
   •   Publish semi-annual program-level E&S summaries and GRM analytics.



5. Enforcement


                                                   Page 59

                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                                              ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)




   •   Conditions of payment: satisfactory E&S performance and timely reporting are prerequisites for
       interim payments.
   •   Removal of personnel, withholding payments, suspension and termination for non-compliance of
       ESHS.
   •   Immediate incident notification: within 24 hours for serious incidents; root-cause and corrective plan
       within 7 days.
   •   Suspension triggers: exceedances of TWW standards; high turbidity/flood warnings; material OHS
       risk—halt activities until corrective actions verified.

6. Timelines

   •   Within 28 days of contract signing: CESMP and subplans; ESHS staffing; permit schedule; high-risk
       method statements.
   •   Prior to mobilization: OHS induction plan; emergency response plan; chance finds procedure.
   •   Monthly: E&S performance report; GRM log; incident statistics; waste manifests.
   •   serious incident notifications; corrective action plans; CESMP updates as and when required.




                                                 Page 60

                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                                                      ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



  Annexure-4: Indicative Checklist(s) for Collecting Information for E&S Screening

Environmental and Social Checklist
Screening & Exclusions                                                                                     Yes/No
No significant land acquisition/physical displacement
Not within critical habitats/protected areas/wetlands
Not within 100m of protected ancient monument/archaeological site
No conversion/degradation of critical habitats or cultural heritage
No banned agrochemicals
No large-scale crop residue burning
Pollution risks within available control/permit capacity
No activities in designated forest areas without clearance
No significant community health and safety risk
Permits                                                                                                    Yes/No
Pollution control board compliance
Forest clearances
Wetlands authority clearance
Traffic diversion permits
Land use permissions for storage tanks
Farmer NOCs for drainage pipes, recharge structures (when applicable)
Panchayat/common land consent
NABL-accredited lab results for TWW
CESMP and Method Statements                                                                                Yes/No
Approved ESMP that includes OHS, traffic, community safety, C&D/hazardous waste, labor
camp/accommodation, pollution prevention measures, emergency response actions and chance finds.
High risk method statements: confined spaces, hot works, lifting and trenching
Monsoon protocols that include early warning systems, stoppage and evacuation
ESMP/ Core principles requirements integrated into DPRs
OHS and community safety                                                                                   Yes/No
PPE provided and used
Emergency preparedness that includes first aid, trained responders, fire extinguishers etc.
Permit to work systems for confined spaces, hot work, LOTO
Work zone safety such as signage, fencing and off-peak scheduling.
Waste and Pollution                                                                                        Yes/No
C&D waste is segregated, licensed transport and authorized disposal. No open burning of C&D waste
Hazardous materials stored and disposed as per rules (e-waste, asbestos, paints, fuels, etc.)
Erosion/sediment measures and turbidity controls
Spill prevention measures and response procedures in place
Water quality monitoring at discharge points
TWW reuse                                                                                                  Yes/No
STP effluent meets CPCB standards for irrigation reuse
Testing for microbiological parameters and heavy metals
Monthly monitoring at STP outlet and first irrigation node.
IEC activities for farmers and restriction on raw eaten crops




                                                           Page 61

                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                                                         ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Suspension triggers and corrective action plan
Sludge handled as per compliance standards
Saline drainage protocols for waterlogged areas                                                               Yes/No
Site-specific saline effluent plan with EC & TDS triggers
Receiving ponds/drains protected with monitoring in place
Water quality monitoring before being reused for irrigation with blending protocols in place
Soil tests such as ESP and soil texture test along with SAR monitoring
GRM                                                                                                           Yes/No
GRM deployed on site with toll-free number
Accessible to migrant workers with anonymity measures and non-retaliation assured
Acknowledgement within 3 days and resolved within 30 days. Trends analyzed and hotspots flagged
Records for grievances and escalations
Cultural Heritage                                                                                             Yes/No
PCR screening undertaken with local heritage structures mapped
Workers trained in chance find procedures
Stop-work trigger defined
Authorities notified if finds occur and restarted only after clearance
Staffing and Training                                                                                         Yes/No
E&S specialists appointed at PIUs
Monthly refresher training with daily toolbox lessons for high-risk tasks
WUA/farmer trainings on water conservation, IPM/INM, and safe TWW reuse
Incidents, Inspections and Audits                                                                             Yes/No
Serious incident notification within 24 hours along with analysis and corrective action plan within 7 days
Monthly OHS/E&S inspections with corrective actions implemented
C&D waste inspections
Water distribution audits to determine equity for head-tail canal users
PAP and DLI Data
E&S focal points appointed at PIUs
E&S clauses integrated into DPRs, bidding documents and CESMPs
Groundwater levels tracked
TWW quality tracked along with quantified data for usage
Saline water discharge tracked
OHS and GRM stats
Consolidated GRM and social inclusion dashboard developed
Equity (head-tail distribution) measure tracked
WUA/drainage society byelaws developed
SOPs developed for WUAs and Drainage Societies
WUA membership and women involvement tracked
Waste use efficiency for MI, sprinkler and DSR integration tracked to determine reduction in water
consumption
Crop diversification, variety and yield data collected
Training modules on relevant topics developed
Farmer incomes increased




                                                            Page 62

                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                                                 ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



                            Annexure-5: Observations from Field Visit
1. The E&S field visit during 01-03 December 2025, included (1) visit to rehabilitation works on water courses
in Chirana (Sonipat) and alongside discussions with WUA members and Panchayat representatives, (2)
rehabilitation and repair work of Sirsa Branch channel at Indri Head (Karnal) and discussions with contractor;
(3) Consultations with farmers and field functionaries of Agriculture Department at Urmi (Kurukshetra), (4)
Visit to visits to Kahni village and Ghilor Kalan villages (Rohtak) to see the functioning of Sub-surface and
vertical drainage system and interacted with farmers; (5) visit to canal based MI at Khachroli village in Jhajjar;
and (6) Interaction with officials from IWRD, MICADA, and Agricultural Department at site as well as in
Panchkula. The key observations from the visit are discussed below.

2. Recommendations and Agreements with IWRD

    a) HIRMI does not have any training modules and out-source training to its experts/ resource persons
       and there is need to develop training modules for WUA and engineers incorporating E&S aspects and
       to be delivered in the manner done in Atal Bhujal using training agencies.
    b) E&S clauses to be integrated into bid document and contract – Bank to review and provide suggestions
       on this. Also, include in ToRs for DPR preparation.
    c) While there is no land acquisition required, there is need to review the DPR format and build the E&S
       screening and mitigation plan preparation (ESMP) in the DPR process itself.

3. Water User Associations (WUAs)

    a) WUAs in Haryana typically consist of 7–8 members, but women’s participation is absent, and both
       members and field staff often lack clarity on registration status. Contributions for watercourse
       rehabilitation are made informally in cash rather than through WUA accounts, undermining
       transparency and accountability. While MICADA Patwaris prepare rehabilitation plans in consultation
       with farmers, there is no clear guidance on prioritizing works or selecting watercourses. The
       warabandi system, managed by IWRD Patwaris, functions effectively, but day-to-day repairs and
       cleaning are left to farmers or WUAs without standardized norms. Financial support from IWRD (Rs.
       360 per foot after 10 years) is insufficient for ongoing maintenance, leaving WUAs dependent on ad
       hoc contributions.
    b) WUAs face significant institutional gaps: no operational guidelines, no training on functioning, and
       limited capacity for operation and maintenance. Registration certificates are often unavailable,
       membership rules unclear, and consolidated accounts (“khata”) missing. Although farmer coverage is
       estimated at 80%, about 60% of watercourses lie on private land, complicating collective
       management. Irrigation relies heavily on groundwater (~65%), raising concerns about hardness and
       salinity that could clog micro-irrigation systems. At the project level, labor facilities remain basic,
       construction waste is reused or sold, and paddy–wheat continues as the dominant cropping pattern.
       Proposed canal widening will require tree removal and lining to address monsoon flooding, with soil
       compaction and infiltration testing recommended due to hardpan conditions. To strengthen WUAs,
       detailed operational guidelines, structured training modules, and clear delivery mechanisms are
       urgently needed to build capacity, ensure equitable participation, and improve the sustainability of
       irrigation management.

4. Canal-Based Micro-Irrigation (MI)

    a) The canal-based micro-irrigation (MI) initiative has been established with minimal initial contribution,
       aside from land provided by the Panchayat. A WUA-type committee of 11 members has been formed
       to oversee the system, but it lacks formal registration and financial accounts. The current arrangement
       places responsibility on contractors for the first three years, during which they also train local youths



                                                    Page 63

                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                                              ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



      to manage operations. After this period, the committee is expected to assume full responsibility,
      covering recurring costs of approximately ₹50,000 per month. Farmers, recognizing the benefits, have
      expressed willingness to take over, but the absence of clear operational guidance or SOPs poses a
      significant challenge.
   b) Operational gaps are evident in the lack of structured policies and training mechanisms for MI
      committees. Without SOPs, committees have no standardized approach to maintenance, resource
      mobilization, or financial management. Evaporation losses from water tanks remain unaddressed, and
      pesticide overuse—particularly in cotton cultivation—raises environmental and health concerns.
      Sharing best practices and promoting integrated pest management could mitigate these risks while
      improving sustainability.
   c) The project currently benefits only 80 farmers, limiting its reach and impact. Expanding coverage will
      require institutional strengthening, policy development, and technical support. Developing SOPs,
      training modules, and delivery mechanisms is essential to ensure committees can manage O&M
      effectively. In addition, introducing guidelines for micro-irrigation at the state level would provide
      consistency and accountability, while addressing technical issues such as evaporation losses and
      promoting sustainable agronomic practices.
   d) In summary, while farmers are motivated to sustain the MI system, the lack of institutional
      frameworks, operational guidance, and environmental safeguards threatens long-term viability.
      Strengthening committee capacity, formalizing policies, and embedding best practices will be critical
      to scaling up benefits and ensuring the sustainability of canal-based micro-irrigation in Haryana

5. Drainage and Reclamation of Waterlogged/Saline Areas

   a) Sub-surface and vertical drainage systems have proven highly effective in reclaiming waterlogged
      lands, reducing water tables, and lowering salinity levels, which has increased farmer demand for such
      interventions. In one case, 1,300 of 4,000 acres were waterlogged due to low-lying terrain, inadequate
      drainage, canal seepage, and highway construction. Subsurface drainage channels now transport
      excess water into sumps for discharge, with water quality tests confirming improvements over three
      years. Although halophytes indicate persistent salt stress, rainfall during the monsoon helps dilute
      salinity, and practices recommended by the Central Soil Salinity Research Institute are being followed
      to stabilize conditions.
   b) Despite technical success, farmers remain reluctant to diversify beyond wheat and rice, preferring
      familiar crops even in reclaimed areas. This highlights the need for early-stage planning with Drainage
      Committees to integrate crop diversification, supported by demonstrations, training, and handholding
      through initiatives like Kisan Mitra, Pashu Sakhi, and Farmer Field Schools. Excessive fertilizer and
      pesticide use remains a concern, though some reduction has been noted. To ensure sustainability,
      integrated pest and nutrient management must be promoted alongside drainage interventions,
      linking reclamation gains with improved soil health and diversified cropping systems.

6. Direct Seeded Rice (DSR) Adoption

   a) The majority of farmers in Haryana—around 65%—are small and marginal, facing persistent
      challenges such as labor shortages and declining groundwater. Direct Seeded Rice (DSR), while
      promoted as a water-saving alternative, is perceived by farmers as requiring more labor and yielding
      less than transplanted paddy. Early sowing under hot and dry conditions further increases water
      demand, and weed management is seen as time-sensitive and difficult. Although land leveling can
      save up to 50% of water and in situ soil management practices like Happy Seeder and mulching reduce
      fertilizer needs, adoption of DSR remains limited. In Kurukshetra, despite the presence of about 50
      DSR groups and 80% farmer coverage through ATMA trainings, only 7,300 acres are under DSR
      compared to a target of 30,000 acres, underscoring the gap between policy ambition and farmer
      uptake.



                                                 Page 64

                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                                               ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



   b) Farmers consistently highlight the need for stronger incentives and institutional support. Current
      payments of INR 4,500 per acre are seen as inadequate, with delays of 5–6 months further
      discouraging adoption. Suggestions include doubling subsidies to INR 9,000 per acre, providing
      machine subsidies, and ensuring timely disbursement. Demonstration plots in every village and more
      intensive training programs are considered essential to build farmer confidence and technical
      capacity. Additionally, research into short-duration rice varieties is needed to address climatic
      constraints. Consultations with farmers and department functionaries emphasize that reforms must
      be farmer-centric, combining financial support, technical training, and practical demonstrations to
      enable wider adoption of DSR and reduce dependence on groundwater in critical “dark zone” areas
      like Kurukshetra.

7. Canal Rehabilitation

   a) Canal rehabilitation projects face challenges such as tree removal, monsoon flooding, and siltation.
      The project requires stronger integration of labor law compliance into contracts and bidding
      documents, with clear clauses and measurable performance indicators to ensure accountability.
      Occupational health and safety considerations, particularly dust suppression, are also highlighted as
      essential to protect workers and nearby communities during construction activities. These measures
      align with broader safeguard requirements and help mitigate risks associated with large-scale civil
      works.
   b) A key design choice under consideration is leaving the canal bottom unlined to promote groundwater
      recharge and reduce costs. While this approach supports aquifer replenishment, it comes with trade-
      offs: reduced conveyance efficiency, slower flow, higher siltation, increased maintenance, and
      potential impacts on water supply reliability. Balancing these outcomes will require careful planning
      and monitoring. On a positive note, construction waste is being reused by local communities,
      demonstrating resource efficiency and contributing to sustainability goals.

8. Institutional and Capacity Gaps

   a) HIRMI currently lacks its own structured training modules or institutional training capacity. Instead, it
      relies on external experts to prepare and deliver training materials, which has led to inconsistencies
      across programs due to variations in approach and content. Functionally, HIRMI operates more as a
      coordination agency rather than a dedicated training institution. While it facilitates programs and
      brings together expertise, the absence of standardized modules and delivery mechanisms limits its
      ability to provide consistent, scalable training to WUAs, engineers, and other stakeholders. Developing
      in-house training packages and accredited delivery systems would strengthen its role and ensure
      uniformity in knowledge transfer.
   b) A key risk for this project is that TWW may not meet CPCB standards for agricultural reuse. If left
      unaddressed, this could lead to soil salinity, groundwater contamination, and even fallow fields,
      undermining both productivity and sustainability. Ensuring compliance through regular monitoring
      and corrective measures is therefore critical. Alongside technical safeguards, timely forest clearance
      is also essential to avoid delays in implementation.

9. Key Recommendations

   a) HIRMI does not have any training modules and out-source training to its experts/ resource persons
      and there is need to develop training modules for WUA and engineers incorporating E&S aspects and
      to be delivered in the manner done in Atal Bhujal using training agencies.
   b) E&S clauses to be integrated into bid document and contract – Bank to review and provide suggestions
      on this. Also, include in ToRs for DPR preparation.




                                                  Page 65

                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                                             ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



   c) While there is no land acquisition required, there is need to review the DPR format and build the E&S
      screening and mitigation plan preparation (ESMP) in the DPR process itself.
   d) Test water hardness/salinity at key sites to inform MI design and filtration.
   e) Conduct soil compaction/infiltration tests at proposed canal sections (Sonipat).
   f) Prepare standardized training modules (HIRMI) and a WUA capacity package (membership,
      documentation, O&M roles).
   g) Set up DSR/MI demonstration plots; streamline incentive/payment processes.
   h) Confirm TWW quality compliance with CPCB standards prior to agricultural reuse.
   i) Designate and train field E&S focal points within IWRD.

10. Risks/Considerations

   a)   Groundwater depletion: align recharge measures with conveyance/efficiency trade-offs; promote
        DSR/crop diversification where feasible.
   b)   MI performance: hardness/salinity management; filtration and maintenance protocols.
   c)   Institution/O&M gaps: capacity building, SOPs, and clarity on roles/contributions.
   d)   Environmental compliance: timely forest clearances; adherence to E&S requirements.
   e)   Salinity/waterlogging: monitor EC and agronomic practices; encourage INM/IPM and crop choices
        suited to local conditions.




                                                 Page 66

                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                                 ESSA - Water Secure Haryana Program (P512898)



Annexure-6: List of Participants in the Multi-stakeholder Consultation Workshop

                             To be Added by Appraisal




                                     Page 67

                                                                                     Official Use Only
