Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Resilience, Early Action, And Disaster Readiness For Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P512715)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 03/04/2026 | Report No: ESRSA04765




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 05, 2026                                                                                Page 1 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilience, Early Action, And Disaster Readiness For Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P512715)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P512715                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       READY-KP                   2026

                     Operation Name            Resilience, Early Action, and Disaster Readiness for Khyber Pakhtunkhwa

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Pakistan                  Pakistan                                MID EAST,NORTH              Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                       AFRICA,AFG,PAK              Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Islamic Republic of       Province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,         03-Mar-2026                 30-Apr-2026
                     Pakistan                  Irrigation Department, Province of
                                               Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Relief,
                                               Rehabilitation and Settlement
                                               Department



Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     26-Jan-2026               265,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve flood resilience in selected areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     This project aims to improve flood resilience in selected areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa through structural and non-
                     structural measures and enhanced institutional capacity for disaster risk management and emergency response.
                     Component 1 - Improving Infrastructure and Planning for Resilience Subcomponent 1.1 - Flood Protection Infrastructure
                     Subcomponent 1.2 - Technical Assistance for Development of Long-Term Infrastructure Investment Plan Infrastructure
                     investments, implemented by the provincial Irrigation Department, will include construction and rehabilitation of gray

                    Mar 05, 2026                                                                                                   Page 2 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilience, Early Action, And Disaster Readiness For Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P512715)



                     flood protection infrastructure, such as embankments, spurs, revetments, retaining walls, flood carrier channels, gabion
                     works, and check dams, complemented by nature-based solutions such as slope stabilization using
                     afforestation/reforestation, terracing, and riverbank restoration. An infrastructure investment plan will also be
                     developed, containing a framework of phased short-, medium-, and long-term investments and informing related future
                     feasibility studies and design work. Component 2 - Establishing Flood Early Warning System Subcomponent 2.1 - Flood
                     Telemetry, Data Integration, and Forecasting Subcomponent 2.2 - Decision Support Systems (DSSs) and Last-Mile
                     Connectivity The project will also establish and operationalize a province-wide integrated Flood Early Warning System
                     through collaboration between the Provincial Disaster Management Authority (PDMA) and Irrigation Department, by
                     linking hydrometeorological observations, forecasting and modeling, decision support systems, and standardized alert
                     dissemination to enable timely and coordinated preparedness and response to climate-exacerbated flood events.
                     Component 3 - Strengthening Institutional and Community Preparedness Subcomponent 3.1 - Strengthening Disaster
                     Preparedness and Community Resilience Subcomponent 3.2 - Enhancing Emergency Response Systems This project will
                     enhance the capacity of provincial institutions and local communities in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa to prepare for and
                     respond to climate-induced multi-hazard disasters, with a particular focus on floods. PDMA and Rescue 1122 will be
                     strengthened through upgraded facilities, improved risk analysis and planning, equipment, specialized training,
                     communication and dispatch systems, and expanded rescue stations. Community-level resilience will be facilitated
                     through improved early-warning dissemination and community-based disaster risk management.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project targets the flood plains and river basins of the Swat, Chitral, Kabul, Kurram, Gomal, and Indus River systems,



Public Disclosure
                     where a large share of the population is concentrated and flood risks are highest. Based on the provincial flood risk
                     assessment, the project implementation will cover a broad range of high-risk districts. The interventions are planned for
                     the North, Central and South zones as well as Merged Districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, based on flood risk exposure,
                     vulnerability of livelihoods, strategic importance of infrastructure, and readiness for implementation..


                     KP is geographically characterized by steep mountains, with settlements often located within narrow valleys along
                     flowing rivers. This terrain contributes towards making the region flood prone in Pakistan affected by climate change
                     leading to severe flood events in the past (2010, 2016, 2020) and most recently in 2025. The floods were caused by
                     cloudbursts and Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs), where landslides were also triggered by glacial melting and heavy
                     monsoon rainfall. These natural hazards cause significant loss of lives, livelihoods and damage to infrastructure. Key
                     environmental features include major rivers (Indus, Swat, Chitral, Kabul), glacier fed tributaries, high biodiversity forests
                     with high ecological value including legally protected areas (National parks, game reserves and wildlife sanctuaries). Soil
                     instability, erosion and landslide prone areas are additional risks for civil works that need to be considered while
                     infrastructure development like check dams and flood retaining structures and Nature Based Solutions (NBS) needs to
                     be integrated into project designs along with grey infrastructure. An exclusion list is developed for screening of high-risk
                     activities and to avoid any investments in protected areas, critical habitat or areas of high biodiversity value.

                     Socially, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) is characterized by patriarchal tribal (defined in Pakistani context where the social
                     systems are communal and operate under their own decision-making systems) communities residing in rural and peri-
                     urban areas, reliant on agriculture, livestock, and communal resources. Women, elderly, and persons with disabilities
                     face heightened disaster risks due to exclusion and limited mobility. In Kalash Valley of district Chitral, indigenous

                    Mar 05, 2026                                                                                                        Page 3 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilience, Early Action, And Disaster Readiness For Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P512715)



                     people maintain distinct socio-cultural systems, while in the Newly Merged Areas (NMAs), tribal landholding and
                     collective ownership create complexities for land access and benefit-sharing. Poverty, limited services, and traditional
                     governance structures further increase social vulnerability, which requires more attention to inclusive engagement,
                     culturally appropriate consultations, and robust E&S risk management.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Component-1 of the project will be implemented by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Irrigation Department, and Component-2
                     and Component-3 will be implemented by Relief, Rehabilitation and Settlement Department (RRSD)of Khyber
                     Pakhtunkhwa with its executing partners Provincial Disaster Management Authority (PDMA) and Rescue 1122. Irrigation
                     Department is currently an implementing agency in WB financed Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Investment and
                     Institutional Support Project (KPRIISP), however the activities are at early stage and no dedicated E & S staff is available
                     with the department. RRSD has not worked with any WB financed project and limited experience of environmental and
                     social due diligence, working with vulnerable groups and gender inclusive approaches. Both departments have qualified
                     engineers and focal person who were engaged and assigned during the project preparation and demonstrated their
                     willingness and commitment to managing environmental and social risks. The capacity of both departments is assessed
                     as low to moderate. To address capacity gaps, targeted capacity building measures are incorporated in the project
                     design through technical assistance and incorporation of measures in ESCP and E & S instruments. Each PIU will recruit
                     dedicated environment specialist, social development specialist, and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Specialist. A
                     gender specialist will also be hired to support both PIUs. Hands on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) is also
                     planned to be provided for the project. The bank team will also continue to provide dedicated trainings to the PIUs and




Public Disclosure
                     through ESF capacity building program of Pakistan.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating of the project is assessed as Substantial at appraisal stage. The project involves
                     infrastructure investments including embankments, flood protection, spurs, retaining walls, gabion work and check
                     dams, telemetry installations and prefabricated rescue stations. These investments are anticipated to have
                     construction/civil works related environmental risks and impacts such as pollution and nuisance (dust, noise, visual
                     degradation of landscapes, debris), other solid waste generation, potential ground/surface water contamination in
                     case where project interventions might be close to the water streams, community nuisance and safety concerns. The
                     project also poses Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks particularly at mountainous terrains and interventions
                     closer to the river channels. The project will exclude any interventions of high-risk nature and in critical habitats or
                     areas of high biodiversity value. The project risks are largely site specific, predictable and reversible with appropriate
                     mitigation measures. The project is planned to support feasibility studies and environmental assessments of schemes
                     in complex basin that may include large dams, for which the requirements of ESS4 Annex-1 safety of dams will apply
                     and TORs will include the provisions of dam safety for large dams. The project will not finance construction of any
                     large dam under the project. The Project may support retroactive financing of small-scale nature mainly dredging and
                     desilting of some drains for which environmental and social risks need to be accounted retroactivity through


                    Mar 05, 2026                                                                                                       Page 4 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilience, Early Action, And Disaster Readiness For Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P512715)



                     environmental and social audit. The borrower capacity at appraisal stage is assessed as low to moderate and will
                     require strengthening through capacity building measures, preferably HEIS. Considering that the project impacts are
                     not expected to be irreversible, unprecedented, and can be managed through appropriate mitigation measures and
                     through capacity strengthening of the borrower, the risk rating is assessed as Substantial at appraisal stage.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is assessed to be Substantial at appraisal stage. All ESS’s, with the exception of ESS9, are relevant
                     given the project details available at this stage. Because the project is implemented in KP, there is a chance that some
                     interventions will take place in conflict affected areas, whereby social risks will amplify given that the areas are
                     simultaneously disaster affected. Small to medium scale land acquisition risks may arise, particularly if the flood
                     protection interventions require additional land, or if encroachments and instances of past anti-encroachment drives
                     (AEDs) are encountered at project sites. As a result, potential physical and/or economic displacement of communities,
                     impacting livelihoods and potentially creating social tensions are likely. Construction interventions will also carry risks
                     related to occupational, community health and safety, labor influx, and child labor/forced labor. Other risks may arise
                     due to local socioeconomic conditions, and the intra-district development disparities in the province, especially
                     considering the Merged Areas. In particular, these disparities may result in unequal distribution of benefits, where
                     some historically underserved communities may be overlooked, potentially creating a sense of inequity, and
                     increasing the vulnerability. The project will have to address risks related to social exclusion and marginalization,
                     especially of women and religious minorities. Exclusion risks are particularly significant in the case of planned early
                     warning systems and disaster preparedness measures, where incomplete outreach (due to poor targeting, lack of
                     appropriate and accessible communication methods, pre-existing inequalities, etc.) could leave excluded groups at




Public Disclosure
                     higher risk of being impacted by future events. Particular attention will need to be placed on outreach activities in
                     Chitral District, a recognized indigenous population of Kalash. Activities that pose adverse risks to IPs will not be
                     permitted, as per the exclusion list in the ESMF.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant. The Project will finance flood protection infrastructure which includes civil works as well as technical
                      assistance for hydrological modeling and feasibility studies of potential large dams under Component-1. Minor
                      refurbishment activities are also anticipated under Component -2. To manage the construction related environmental
                      and social risks, the Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) consistent
                      with ESS1. The ESMF includes criteria to exclude activities with high environmental and social risk, including activities
                      undertaken in protected areas, complex interventions, large dams, and activities planned in areas where AEDs have
                      taken place in the past 3 years. The complete exclusion list is included in the ESMF. For technical assistance under
                      Component-1.3, the ESMF includes provision to include dam safety requirements under ESS4 Annex- 1 Safety of Dam
                      in the TORs of the feasibility studies and E & S documents. An Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) has
                      been prepared to capture timelines for ESMPs, RAPs and/or other relevant documents. In addition, sub-project
                      specific ESMPs will also be developed as per guidance of ESMF. The ESMF identifies risks of elite capture, where
                      influential actors may dominate the prioritization of investments or the distribution of water, leading to the exclusion


                    Mar 05, 2026                                                                                                        Page 5 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilience, Early Action, And Disaster Readiness For Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P512715)



                      of vulnerable groups like women, religious minorities, and persons with disabilities. There is also a risk that early
                      warning systems may not reach populations with low literacy or those in remote areas. Mitigation measures center
                      on the robust implementation of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and the establishment of Community
                      Disaster Management Committees (CDMCs) that include mandatory representation for women and youth. A study on
                      AED and illegal constructions/informal settlements on public land is also being conducted and will be available prior
                      to project effectiveness. For the investments that may be retroactively financed (dredging and desilting
                      interventions), it is anticipated that the investments are small scale works with moderate to low environmental and
                      social risks. The bank team will provide upfront guidance on preparation and implementation of required E & S
                      instruments under ESF for these activities which will benefit the E & S audit and decision on investments to be
                      retroactively financed. In case of retroactively financed activities, E & S audit will be conducted acceptable to the
                      bank prior to disbursement for activities subject to retroactive financing.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant. The Project will involve multiple stakeholders, including provincial departments (Irrigation, PDMA,
                      Rescue 1122), local governments, communities in flood-prone areas, and vulnerable groups such as women, elderly,
                      and persons with disabilities who are disproportionately affected by disasters. To ensure broad access, the Early
                      Warning System (EWS) will utilize local languages (Pashto/Urdu) and accessible technologies like Interactive Voice
                      Response (IVR) and voice-enabled chatbots. Technical selection criteria for all sub-projects will be publicly disclosed
                      to ensure transparency. Furthermore, the project will maintain a multi-level Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for
                      both communities and workers, ensuring that feedback is regularly collected and addressed to prevent social tensions
                      and ensure equitable distribution of project benefits. The Borrower has prepared the Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Public Disclosure
                      (SEP) in line with ESS10, which outlines strategies for inclusive consultations, culturally appropriate information
                      disclosure, and mechanisms to address grievances through a GRM. Special attention will be given to engaging
                      disadvantaged and vulnerable groups to ensure their participation and access to project benefits.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant. The Project will engage direct workers through the Project Implementation Units (PIUs),contracted
                      workers for construction and rehabilitation of flood protection infrastructure, and community workers under
                      community-based disaster risk management activities Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks are significant due
                      to the nature of construction near water bodies, where workers face risks of drowning from strong currents, flash
                      floods, and GLOF events, unstable river banks especially during the monsoon. Other risks include unsafe working
                      conditions, deep excavations, electrical hazards, and exposure to hazardous waste. The project also identifies risks of
                      child labor and forced labor, particularly in remote and economically disadvantaged regions like the Newly Merged
                      Districts (NMDs), and social conflicts arising from labor influx, such as the spread of communicable diseases and
                      disrespect for local cultural norms. Mitigation measures involve strict compliance with the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
                      Occupational Safety and Health Act and the implementation of site-specific OHS plans. Contractors will be required to
                      provide appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE), including life jackets and rescue ropes for water-based
                      work, and conduct regular safety trainings. To prevent child labor, mandatory age verification via Computerised
                      National Identity Cards (CNIC) is required for all hires. Labor influx impacts will be mitigated by giving preference to
                      local hiring and requiring all staff to sign and follow a Worker Code of Conduct that mandates respect for local
                      customs. To address these risks, the Borrower will prepare Labor Management Procedures (LMP) in line with ESS2,
                      including measures on fair recruitment, age verification, worker protection, OHS provisions, and a worker-specific


                    Mar 05, 2026                                                                                                     Page 6 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilience, Early Action, And Disaster Readiness For Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P512715)



                      Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The LMP will be prepared prior to commencement of the project’s physical
                      works.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant. Construction and rehabilitation activities pose risks of soil erosion, sedimentation, and
                      contamination from fuel spills or improper waste management. Excavation and quarrying may disturb riverbanks,
                      making them susceptible to wind and rain erosion. Air quality is expected to decline due to dust from vehicle
                      movement and emissions from heavy machinery, while noise and vibration from bulldozers and generators may
                      disturb residents and wildlife. Mitigation measures include the preparation of site-specific Waste Management Plans
                      (WMP) to handle construction debris, hazardous materials, and solid waste management. Soil erosion will be
                      managed through slope stabilization, bioengineering, and immediate restoration of disturbed sites. Air pollution will
                      be mitigated by water sprinkling at dust-raising sites and enforcing speed limits for construction vehicles. To manage
                      water contamination, construction camps and fuel storage must be located at least 500 meters away from water
                      bodies and placed on bounded, concrete floors. In addition, upstream check dams and related interventions may
                      alter sediment dynamics, requiring careful design to avoid downstream impacts. The Project may require use of
                      community resources and construction materials such as sand, gravel, and stone; therefore, sourcing needs to be
                      managed responsibly, with strict requirements for use of materials only from legally approved quarries to minimize
                      environmental and social risks. The Project already planned to incorporate nature-based solutions to compliment the
                      grey infrastructure. The ESMF provides guidance for resource efficiency, pollution prevention, sustainable sourcing,
                      and waste management in line with ESS3.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant. The project interventions will take place in close proximity to local communities, often in
                      mountainous and flood-prone terrain. In many of the existing flood protection infrastructure, communities’
                      infrastructures (including houses, etc.) are built up to the boundaries of the Irrigation Department’s Right of Way
                      (RoW), and in some cases extending beyond the RoW. The construction activities will pose risks that include
                      increased traffic, operation of heavy machinery, dust and noise. Lack of existing safety structures (boundary walls,
                      railings, etc) particularly along water conveyance structures pose risks of accidental drowning and fall injuries to local
                      communities. Additional risks include slope instability, landslides, and erosion during earthworks in hilly and unstable
                      areas, which may directly affect nearby settlements and community assets. The presence of workers near villages
                      may also raise concerns around labor influx and social interaction risks. To mitigate these risks, the project will
                      develop and implement site-specific Occupational and Community Health and Safety Plans, ensure traffic and road
                      safety management, and establish emergency preparedness and response plans as part of Environmental and Social
                      Management Plans (ESMPs). Labor influx may also lead to increased risk of SEA/SH incidents, and communicable
                      diseases. These risks will be mitigated through implementation of a GBV/SEA/SH Action Plan. The ESMPs will be
                      prepared and disclosed for each sub-project site prior to the commencement of physical/civil works related activities.
                      The use of nature-based solutions will also contribute to stabilizing slopes, reducing disaster risks, and enhancing
                      overall community safety.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant




                    Mar 05, 2026                                                                                                       Page 7 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilience, Early Action, And Disaster Readiness For Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P512715)



                      ESS5 is considered relevant. Risks related to ESS5 are particularly relevant for the larger scale infrastructure activities
                      under subcomponent 1.1. Although most of these activities are planned to be located on existing government owned
                      land; however, localized temporary restrictions, or access issues to water resources or livelihood disruption cannot be
                      ruled out at this stage, particularly for check dams, embankments, or bioengineering sites near communities. For
                      flood protection infrastructure, there is a high likelihood of encountering informal encroachments, especially along
                      drains, canals, and riverbanks where the infrastructure investments are expected to be located. Activities under other
                      components are of smaller scope and scale, and carry minimal risks related to ESS5. Past anti encroachments drivers
                      along drains and waterways are also likely to be encountered. The screening checklists in the ESMF includes questions
                      on potential AEDs, and consistent with the exclusion list, project activities will not be permitted in areas where AEDs
                      have been conducted in the past three years. A detailed study on AEDs is currently underway, and will guide the
                      project on site selection and finalization of proposed schemes. A Resettlement Framework (RF) has been prepared as
                      part of the ESMF to guide screening and management of any such impacts during implementation. Where applicable,
                      and as directed by the RF, sub-project specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be developed in line with ESS5
                      principles. The project will screen for investments as per mitigation hierarchy whereby requiring land acquisition to
                      be avoided with no resettlement of any type, and zero to limited economic and physical displacements. The Bank will
                      carefully review voluntary land donations, access, and community agreements to minimize displacement or livelihood
                      impacts. Land acquisition and VLD will be considered as last resort measures, and all such instances will be shared
                      with the World Bank Task Team for case-by-case approval. No activities involving land acquisition or VLD will be
                      permitted without prior World Bank approval. Forced evictions will be strictly prohibited. For technical assistance
                      under Component 1.3, the TORs of feasibility studies and E & S document will integrate principles of ESS5.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant as works will occur in ecologically sensitive areas, including rivers, mountain catchments, and
                      forested regions. Construction and rehabilitation activities, particularly in mountain catchments and forested regions,
                      may adversely affect local flora and fauna. Risks include the clearing of vegetation, disturbance of aquatic habitats
                      through dredging and sedimentation, and the restriction of wildlife movement. Workers may also damage local
                      agriculture or engage in illegal hunting and poaching. Operational risks involve the loss of storage capacity in natural
                      waterways due to sedimentation from upstream erosion. Mitigation measures include a strict exclusion policy,
                      detailed in the ESMF, for investments that significantly impact critical habitats. To compensate for any necessary tree
                      removal, the project will implement a plantation strategy with a ratio of five native trees for every one tree cut.
                      Contractors must provide LPG to workers to prevent the use of local firewood, and all staff will be strictly prohibited
                      from hunting or harassing wildlife. Watershed management, including afforestation and bioengineering in upper
                      catchments, will be used to stabilize slopes and reduce sediment loads entering the system. Nature-based solutions
                      are a positive feature of the Project, contributing to reforestation, afforestation, and ecosystem restoration. Site-
                      specific screening as directed by the ESMF will ensure avoidance of critical habitats and legally protected areas and
                      areas with high biodiversity significance. Mitigation hierarchy measures (avoid, minimize, restore, offset) will be
                      applied where impacts are unavoidable. Contractors will comply with biodiversity management requirements, and
                      local forestry departments will be engaged in planning and oversight. The ESMF contains guidance on identifying and
                      managing risks related to ESS6. An overarching Biodiversity Management Plan (BMP) will be prepared to ensure no-
                      net-loss of biodiversity in naturais habitats. The plan will outline measures to avoid, minimize, or restore impacts, and
                      will guide measures to be incorporated into the site specific ESMPs.


                    Mar 05, 2026                                                                                                        Page 8 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilience, Early Action, And Disaster Readiness For Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P512715)



                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                              Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is relevant. The project may plan activities in Chitral region where the Kalash community meets the Bank criteria
                      of Indigenous people. These communities may face exclusion from project benefits or find their traditional water
                      rights and historical distribution practices disrupted by new irrigation and flood protection structures. There is also a
                      risk that technical designs may not account for the unique cultural and social context of these historically
                      underserved groups. Activities that will have adverse impacts on IPs are on the exclusion list in the ESMF and will not
                      be permitted. Mitigation measures focus on ensuring meaningful and culturally appropriate consultations as per the
                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan. The project committed to respecting traditional water rights and avoiding locations
                      where disputes already exist. Specific efforts will be made to include the Kalash and other vulnerable groups in
                      Community Disaster Management Committees (CDMCs) and ensure that water allocation plans are transparent and
                      inclusive. By prioritizing these communities for early warning systems and community-based disaster risk
                      management training, the project aims to ensure they are not disproportionately affected by flood risks or excluded
                      from the resilience-building benefits of the project. While most of the infrastructure activities are planned on
                      Government owned land, however any investment in such areas will be carefully screened for any impacts on
                      customary land use and collective rights. As the project location are not known, the project will prepare an
                      Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) to guide screening and consultation process in accordance to ESS7, if
                      needed during project implementation and timelines will be recorded in ESCP. The IPPF and plans will emphasize
                      meaningful, culturally appropriate consultations and participation, ensuring that Indigenous communities can
                      influence project design and benefit equitably. The IPPF will be prepared and disclosed prior to project
                      commencement, and site-specific IPPs will be prepared prior to the initiation of the relevant sub-projects.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      ESS8 is relevant as the project spans historically and archaeologically rich areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. There is a
                      moderate risk of "chance finds" during excavation and earthworks. Important physical and cultural resources could
                      be inadvertently damaged or destroyed if sites are not properly screened. Mitigation measures require that all
                      subproject sites be screened for the presence of cultural resources prior to the commencement of any civil works. In
                      the event of a discovery, a formal "Chance Find Procedure" (as outlined in the ESMF) will be triggered. This procedure
                      requires the contractor to immediately stop all work in the vicinity of the find, secure the site to prevent further
                      disturbance, and notify the relevant government authorities and the World Bank. Work will only resume once a
                      qualified professional has evaluated the find and appropriate protection or salvage measures have been
                      implemented. The project is not planned to have any interventions directly related to cultural heritage sites.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not relevant as there is no financial interemediary involved in the project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No


                    Mar 05, 2026                                                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Resilience, Early Action, And Disaster Readiness For Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P512715)



                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                              No
                       Use of borrower framework is not considered as borrower capacity in E&S is limited.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                       None

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     At appraisal stage, the borrower has prepared the following documents:
                     1.      Draft Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Framework (RF)
                     3.      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     4.      Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)

                     Site specific ESMPs and RPs will be prepared once the subproject interventions are identified during project
                     implementation.
                     E & S Audit as per ESS1 will be conducted in case of retroactive financing prior to disbursement of activities subject to
                     retroactive financing



Public Disclosure
                     The IPPF will be prepared following project effectiveness in case the project planned to have interventions in Kalash
                     area. This document will be prepared prior to initiating any physical activities.

                     The LMP will be prepared within 60 days of project effectiveness, prior to the procurement of contractors for physical
                     works.

                     The GBV Action plan will be prepared following six months of project effectiveness.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Bilal Khalid                           Title:          Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                      Email:                  bkhalid@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Yohannes Yemane Kesete                 Job Title:      Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  ykesete@worldbank.org



                    Mar 05, 2026                                                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Resilience, Early Action, And Disaster Readiness For Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P512715)




                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                 Bilal Khalid, Yohannes Yemane Kesete

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                        Sana Ahmed

                     ADM Social Specialist:                               Babar Naseem Khan




Public Disclosure




                    Mar 05, 2026                                                                                  Page 11 of 11
