Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Flood Resilience Project (P512715)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 09/25/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05186




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 29, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Flood Resilience Project (P512715)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P512715                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       KPFRP                        2026

                     Operation Name            Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Flood Resilience Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Pakistan                  Pakistan                                 MID EAST,NORTH               Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                        AFRICA,AFG,PAK               Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Islamic Republic of       Province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,          27-Jan-2026                  30-Mar-2026
                     Pakistan                  Irrigation Department, Province of
                                               Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Relief,
                                               Rehabilitation and Settlement
                                               Department



Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     10-Sep-2025               250,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve flood resilience in selected areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The operation aim to improve flood resilience in selected areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa through a mix of structural and
                     non-structural measures and enhanced institutional capacity for disaster risk management. Infrastructure investments
                     will include construction and rehabilitation of flood protection works—such as embankments, spurs, revetments,
                     retaining walls, flood carrier channels, gabion works, and check dams—complemented by nature-based solutions
                     (afforestation/reforestation, terracing, bio-engineering). The project will also establish a province-wide Flood Forecast

                    Sep 29, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Flood Resilience Project (P512715)



                     and Warning System by expanding and harmonizing observation networks, upgrading modeling and data systems, and
                     strengthening information-sharing protocols. Institutional and community preparedness will be enhanced by
                     strengthening PDMA and Rescue 1122 through upgraded facilities, equipment, training, communication and dispatch
                     systems, expanded rescue stations, improved early-warning dissemination, and community-based DRM.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project interventions are planned in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province of Pakistan, covering both rural and peri-
                     urban areas, however the exact districts and location of interventions are not finalized at concept stage. KP is
                     geographically characterized by steep mountains, with settlements often located within narrow valleys along flowing
                     rivers. This terrain contributes towards making the region flood prone in Pakistan affected by climate change leading to
                     severe flood events in the past (2010, 2016, 2020) and most recently in 2025. The floods were caused by cloudbursts
                     and Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs), where landslides were also triggered by glacial melting and heavy monsoon
                     rainfall. These natural hazards cause significant loss of lives, livelihoods and damage to infrastructure. Key
                     environmental features include major rivers (Indus, Swat, Chitral, Kabul), glacier fed tributaries, high biodiversity forests
                     with high ecological value. Soil instability and landslide prone areas are additional risks that need to be considered while
                     infrastructure development like check dams and flood retaining structures.
                     Socially, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) is characterized by patriarchal tribal communities residing in rural and peri-urban
                     areas, reliant on agriculture, livestock, and communal resources. Women, elderly, and persons with disabilities face
                     heightened disaster risks due to exclusion and limited mobility. In Kalash Vallley of district Chitral, indigenous people
                     maintain distinct socio-cultural systems, while in the Newly Merged Areas (NMAs), tribal landholding and collective



Public Disclosure
                     ownership create complexities for land access and benefit-sharing. Poverty, limited services, and traditional governance
                     structures further increase social vulnerability, which requires more attention to inclusive engagement, culturally
                     appropriate consultations, and robust E&S risk management.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Component-1 of the project will be implemented by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Irrigation Department, and Component-2
                     will be implemented by Relief, Rehabilitation and Settlement Department (RRSD)of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa which is
                     parent department of PDMA and Rescue 1122. Irrigation Department is currently an implementing agency in WB
                     financed KPRIISP while RRSD is yet to be a partner in any WB financed project. Detailed institutional assessment will be
                     conducted during project preparation and adequate E & S staffing will be proposed in both departments proportionate
                     to the project risk and interventions.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating of the project is assessed as Substantial at concept stage. The project involve
                     infrastructure investments including embankments, flood protection , spurs, retaining walls, gabion work and check
                     dams. These investments are anticipated to have construction/civil works related environmental risks and impacts


                    Sep 29, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Flood Resilience Project (P512715)



                     such as pollution and nuisance (dust, noise, visual degradation of landscapes, debris), other solid waste generation,
                     potential ground/surface water contamination in case where project interventions might be close to the water
                     streams, community nuisance and safety concerns. The project also pose Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks
                     particularly at mountanous terrains and interventions closer to the river channels. The project will exclude any
                     interventions in critical habitats or areas of high biodiversity value.These risks are largely site specific, predictable and
                     reversible with appropriate mitigation measures. The project is planned to support feasibility studies and
                     environmental assessments of schemes in complex basin that may include large dams, for which the requirements of
                     ESS4 Annex-1 safety of dams will apply and TORs will include the provisions of dam safety for large dams. The project
                     will not finance construction of any large dam under the project. The borrower capacity at concept stage is assessed
                     as low to moderate and will require strengthening through capacity building measures, preferably HEIS. Considering
                     that the project impacts are not expected to be irreversible, unprecedented, and can be managed through
                     appropriate mitigation measures and through capacity strengthening of the borrower, the risk rating is assessed as
                     Substantial at concept stage.
                                                                                                                                        Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is assessed to be Substantial at concept stage. All ESS’s, with the exception of ESS9, are relevant
                     given the project details available at this stage. Because the project is implemented in KP, there is a chance that some
                     interventions will take place in conflict affected areas, whereby social risks will amplify given that the areas are
                     simultaneously disaster affected. Land acquisition risks can arise, if the flood protection interventions require
                     additional land. As a result, potential physical and/or economic displacement of communities, impacting livelihoods
                     and potentially creating social tensions are likely . Construction interventions will also carry risks related to




Public Disclosure
                     occupational, and community health and safety. Other risks may arise due to local socioeconomic conditions, and the
                     intra-district development disparities in the province, especially considering the Merged Areas. In particular, these
                     disparities may result in unequal distribution of benefits, where some historically underserved communities may be
                     overlooked, potentially creating a sense of inequity, and increasing the vulnerability. Specifically, these disparities
                     may result in unequal distribution of benefits, where some communities may be overlooked, potentially creating a
                     sense of inequity, and increasing the vulnerability of the overlooked populations. The project will have to address
                     risks related to social exclusion and marginalization, especially of women and religious minorities. Exclusion risks are
                     particularly significant in the case of planned early warning systems and disaster preparedness measures, where
                     incomplete outreach (due to poor targeting, lack of appropriate and accessible communication methods, pre-existing
                     inequalities, etc.) could leave excluded groups at higher risk of being impacted by future events. Particular attention
                     will need to be placed on outreach activities in Chitral District, a recognized indigenous population of Kalash.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                      Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant. The Project will finance flood protection infrastructure which includes civil works as well as technical
                      assistance for hydrological modeling and feasibility studies of potential large dams under Component-1. Minor
                      refurbishment activities are also anticipated under Component -2. To manage the construction related environmental
                      and social risks, the Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) consistent


                    Sep 29, 2025                                                                                                           Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Flood Resilience Project (P512715)



                      with ESS1.ESMF will include criteria to exclude any complex or high risk activities, activities in high biodiversity value
                      areas and interventions requiring land acquisition. For technical assistance under Component-1.3, the ESMF will
                      include provision to include dam safety requirements under ESS4 Annex- 1 Safety of Dam in the TORs of the feasibility
                      studies and E & S documents. The bank will agree on an Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) to capture
                      timelines for ESMPs, RAPs and/or other relevant documents.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant. TheProject will involve multiple stakeholders, including provincial departments (Irrigation, PDMA,
                      Rescue 1122), local governments, communities in flood-prone areas, and vulnerable groups such as women, elderly,
                      and persons with disabilities who are disproportionately affected by disasters. Meaningful stakeholder engagement is
                      critical for ensuring community ownership of flood protection schemes, acceptance of early warning systems, and the
                      effectiveness of preparedness measures. The Borrower will prepare a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) in line with
                      ESS10, which will outline strategies for inclusive consultations, culturally appropriate information disclosure, and
                      mechanisms to address grievances through a project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). Special attention
                      will be given to engaging disadvantaged and vulnerable groups to ensure their participation and access to project
                      benefits.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant. The Project will engage direct workers through the Project Implementation Units (PIUs),contracted
                      workers for construction and rehabilitation of flood protection infrastructure, and community workers under




Public Disclosure
                      community-based disaster risk management activities. Labor and working conditions risks include occupational health
                      and safety (OHS) hazards related to construction activities (e.g., working near rivers and streams, heavy machinery
                      use, and potential exposure to hazardous materials), as well as risks of unequal treatment, child labor, or lack of
                      proper grievance handling. To address these, the Borrower will prepare Labor Management Procedures (LMP) in line
                      with ESS2, including measures on fair recruitment, age verification, worker protection, OHS provisions, and a worker-
                      specific Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant. Construction activities could result in the generation of solid and hazardous waste, including spoil,
                      debris, and wastewater. In addition, upstream check dams and related interventions may alter sediment dynamics,
                      requiring careful design to avoid downstream impacts. The Project may require use of community resources and
                      construction materials such as sand, gravel, and stone; therefore, sourcing needs to be managed responsibly, with
                      strict requirements for use of materials only from legally approved quarries to minimize environmental and social
                      risks. The Project already planned to incorporate nature-based solutions to compliment the grey infrastructure . An
                      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will provide guidance for resource efficiency, pollution
                      prevention, sustainable sourcing, and waste management in line with ESS3.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant. The project interventions will take place in close proximity to local communities, often in
                      mountainous and flood-prone terrain. The construction activities will pose risks that include increased traffic,
                      operation of heavy machinery, dust and noise. Additional risks include slope instability, landslides, and erosion during


                    Sep 29, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Flood Resilience Project (P512715)



                      earthworks in hilly and unstable areas, which may directly affect nearby settlements and community assets. The
                      presence of workers near villages may also raise concerns around labor influx and social interaction risks.To mitigate
                      these risks, the project will develop and implement site-specific Occupational and Community Health and Safety
                      Plans, ensure traffic and road safety management, and establish emergency preparedness and response plans as part
                      of Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The use of nature-based solutions will also contribute to
                      stabilizing slopes, reducing disaster risks, and enhancing overall community safety.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                 Relevant

                      ESS5 is considered relevant at Concept stage. Although most of the activities are planned to be located on
                      government owned land; however, localized temporary restrictions, or access issues to water resources or livelihood
                      disruption cannot be ruled out at this stage, particularly for check dams, embankments, or bioengineering sites near
                      communities. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to guide screening and management of any
                      such impacts during implementation. Where applicable, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be developed in line
                      with ESS5 principles. The project will screen for investments requiring land acquisition to avoid and limit
                      resettlement, economic and physical displacements. The Bank will carefully review voluntary land donations, access,
                      and community agreements to minimize displacement or livelihood impacts. For technical assistance under
                      Component 1.3, the TORs of feasibility studies and E & S document will integrate principles of ESS5.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                  Relevant
                      Resources




Public Disclosure
                      ESS6 is relevant as works will occur in ecologically sensitive areas, including rivers, mountain catchments, and
                      forested regions. Potential risks include disturbance of aquatic and terrestrial habitats, erosion, sedimentation, and
                      impacts on flora and fauna. Nature-based solutions are a positive feature of the Project, contributing to reforestation,
                      afforestation, and ecosystem restoration. Site-specific screening will ensure avoidance of critical habitats and legally
                      protected areas and areas with high biodiversity significance. Mitigation hierarchy measures (avoid, minimize,
                      restore, offset) will be applied where impacts are unavoidable. Contractors will comply with biodiversity management
                      requirements, and local forestry departments will be engaged in planning and oversight. The ESMF of the project will
                      guide and incorporate elements of ESS6.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                             Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is relevant. The project may plan activities in Chitral region where the Kalash community meets the bank criteria
                      of Indigenous people. While most of the infrastructure activities are planned on Government owned land, however
                      any investment in such areas needs to be carefully screened for any impacts on customary land use and collective
                      rights. As the project location are not known, the project will prepare Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
                      to guide screening and consultation process in accordance to ESS7, if needed during project implementation and
                      timelines will be recorded in ESCP . The IPPF and plans will emphasize meaningful, culturally appropriate
                      consultations and participation, ensuring that Indigenous communities can influence project design and benefit
                      equitably.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant



                    Sep 29, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Flood Resilience Project (P512715)



                      ESS8 is relevant as construction and earthworks may lead to chance finds of archaeological or cultural resources,
                      particularly in historically rich areas of KP. The Project will include a Chance Finds Procedure in contracts and ESMPs.
                      The project is not planned to have any interventions directly related to cultural heritage sites.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not relevant as there is no financial interemediary involved in the project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                      No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                 No
                       Use of borrower framework is not considered as borrower capacity in E&S is limited.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                    No
                       None at the concept stage




Public Disclosure
                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The borrower will prepare the following documents by Appraisal:
                     1.       Draft Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                     2.       Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                     3.       Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     4.       Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     Site specific ESIAs/ESMPs will be prepared once the subproject interventions are identified during project
                     implementation
                     IPPF will be prepared during project implementation in case the project planned to have interventions in Kalash area
                     LMP will also be prepared during Project Implementation.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Bilal Khalid                           Title:           Disaster Risk Management Specialist


                    Sep 29, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Flood Resilience Project (P512715)



                      Email:                  bkhalid@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Yohannes Yemane Kesete             Job Title:     Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                Specialist

                      Email:                  ykesete@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                  Bilal Khalid, Yohannes Yemane Kesete

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                         Sana Ahmed

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                Babar Naseem Khan



Public Disclosure




                    Sep 29, 2025                                                                                              Page 8 of 8
