Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01628




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                         WESTERN AND CENTRAL                                         Ghana Market Access and
                          Ghana                                                       P513708
                                                         AFRICA                                                      Connectivity Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         13-Apr-2026                  28-May-2026                    Transport
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Ministry of Roads and
                          Republic of Ghana
                                                         Highways

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)




_For Official Use Only_
                          To improve and sustain all-season farm-to-market road connectivity in selected districts of Ghana.

                          Components
                          Rehabilitation of feeder roads
                          Road maintenance and support to the road fund reforms
                          Project management and implementation support

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                            523.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                                 523.00
                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               500.00
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

                          DETAILS


                                                                                                                                               Page 1
                                   The World Bank
                                   Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)



                                World Bank Group Financing
                                  International Development Association (IDA)                                                               500.00
                                    IDA Credit                                                                                              500.00
                                Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                  Counterpart Funding                                                                                        23.00
                                    Borrower/Recipient                                                                                       23.00




                              @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@ffiprocessing#doctemplate

                              @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                           Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                           Substantial




_For Official Use Only_
                              Decision
                              The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                              B. Introduction and Context

                            Country Context
                          1. Following the 2022 macroeconomic crisis, Ghana’s economic recovery has gained significant momentum. GDP
                             growth accelerated to 5.7 percent in 2024, and further to 6 percent in 2025— the fastest pace since 2019 — driven by
                             a broadening of economic activity beyond the extractive sectors. Over 2009–2025, growth averaged 5.8 percent,
                             outpacing many regional peers. However, poverty reduction has stalled, with 54.1 percent of the population living
                             below the US$4.15/day middle-income poverty line per day in 2025. High inflation, particularly food prices - and fiscal
                             imbalances eroded household welfare1 and macroeconomic stability, prompting a US$3 billion IMF program in 2023
                             and US$360 million in World Bank budget support in 2025. Since late 2024, inflation has declined rapidly, with
                             Consumer Price Index (CPI) falling from 23.8 percent to 3.2 percent year-on-year in March 2026, supported by tighter
                             monetary policy and sharp currency appreciation. Fiscal and external balances have improved, and progress has been
                             made on debt restructuring, reflecting strong program ownership by the authorities, favorable external developments,
                             and improved investor confidence.
                          2. Agriculture remains a key pillar of Ghana’s economy, accounting for 22.8 percent of GDP in 2025 and employing
                             about 38 percent of the labor force.2 Despite its importance for food security and rural livelihoods, the sector has not
                             contributed to economic transformation and structural change to the extent expected. Productivity remains low, and

                          1
                              IMF Country Report No. 25/343
                          2
                              MoFA (2025).

                                                                                                                                                 Page 2
                                  The World Bank
                                  Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)


                              value addition outside primary production is limited. Yields for major staple crops remain below 50 percent of their
                              potential, and only about 6 percent of workers in Ghana’s agrifood system are employed in value-adding activities,
                              where the highest margins are generated. These constraints are partly linked to poor rural road conditions in key
                              agricultural production areas, which limit market access, increase post-harvest losses, including deterioration in
                              product quality - and reduce farm incomes. As a result, economic opportunities in rural areas remain limited,
                              contributing to labor shifts toward low-productivity informal services and weakening the poverty-reducing potential of
                              structural transformation.
                          3. Ghana’s priority agricultural value chains play a critical role in food security and economic activity, particularly
                             staples such as maize, rice, and cassava. The Government of Ghana (GoG) therefore aims to transform agriculture into
                             a modern, competitive, and job-creating sector by targeting public and private investment toward these value chains,
                             including improvements in transport connectivity to markets. These commodities reflect Ghana’s comparative
                             advantage and its potential to generate employment while reducing food price inflation and the food import bill,
                             estimated at about US$3 billion annually. Demand for key staples consistently exceeds efficient domestic supply. Ghana
                             imports roughly US$500 million of rice annually, and between 10,000 and 60,000 metric tons of yellow maize each year
                             to meet demand from the poultry sector. At the same time, cassava—cultivated by approximately 90 percent of rural
                             households and central to food security and rural incomes—remains largely produced within low-productivity,
                             subsistence-oriented systems. These constraints are partly linked to limited market connectivity, as many major
                             production areas are served by weak feeder and trunk road networks. Strengthening rural road infrastructure is




_For Official Use Only_
                             therefore critical to reducing transport costs, lowering post-harvest losses, and enabling farmers to participate more
                             effectively in value addition and regional markets.
                          4. To boost agricultural productivity and job creation, the GoG launched the Big Push Initiative in 2024, prioritizing
                             agriculture, logistics, and value-chain development. Under this initiative, the Agriculture for Economic Transformation
                             Agenda (AETA) was introduced, with the Feed Ghana Program (2025–2028) serving as the Ministry of Food and
                             Agriculture’s flagship instrument to implement AETA and accelerate agricultural modernization. In parallel, the GoG
                             aims to upgrade and rehabilitate approximately 5,000 kilometers of roads. Improving road infrastructure—particularly
                             feeder roads—is a critical complementary investment to strengthen linkages between agricultural production areas,
                             transport systems, and logistics networks.
                          5. Efficient road and logistics networks are essential to ensure reliable movement of agricultural goods from production
                             areas to markets and processing centers. This requires coordinated investments beyond feeder roads, including trunk
                             connections, storage, transport services, and supporting infrastructure. Strengthening connectivity will help reduce
                             transport costs and post-harvest losses while improving market access. These improvements are expected to enhance
                             productivity, support job creation, and promote more inclusive growth, particularly by better integrating remote areas
                             into national markets.
                          6. Limited access to all-weather roads can exacerbate gender disparities in rural areas. Women represent a large share
                             of the agricultural labor force and play a dominant role in post-harvest activities such as storage, processing, and
                             marketing.3 Evidence suggests that women face disproportionate constraints in accessing reliable transport services,
                             storage facilities, and market infrastructure, which restricts their participation in higher-value markets and increases
                             post-harvest losses and transaction costs—particularly in northern rural regions.4,5 In the transport sector, women
                             represent only about 3 percent of construction and maintenance workers, reflecting skills gaps, restrictive hiring
                             practices, safety concerns, and prevailing social norms.6 Improving rural road connectivity can therefore help reduce

                          3
                            AAFORD PCU (2024) Gender Strategy, Ghana.
                          4
                            MEDA (2022) Why MEDA Works With Rural Women.
                          5
                            Ograh, T et al (2025).
                          6
                            Darko, E et al (2016)

                                                                                                                                                 Page 3
                                  The World Bank
                                  Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)


                               gender disparities by facilitating women’s access to markets, services, and employment opportunities in agricultural
                               value chains.


                            Sectoral and Institutional Context
                          7. Road transport dominates mobility in Ghana, carrying over 90 percent of passenger and freight traffic.7 The country’s
                              road network totals about 94,200 km, of which only 27 percent is paved8, and more than half is in fair to impassable
                              condition.9 Feeder roads—accounting for over 50 percent of the network—are in the poorest condition, with more
                              than 60 percent classified as fair or impassable. These roads connect agricultural, mining, tourism, and other productive
                              areas to the trunk and urban network, making them critical for economic activity and market access. Although Ghana’s
                              road density is above the regional average,10 significant spatial disparities persist. Northern regions remain
                              underserved, while the southern half of the country has higher road density but often poor service levels, resulting in
                              longer travel times and higher transport costs for accessing markets and economic opportunities.
                          8. Chronic underfunding and insufficient maintenance have undermined Ghana’s road network and connectivity, while
                             natural hazard events further accelerate asset deterioration. Road development and maintenance are costly,
                             absorbing close to 30 percent of the national budget11; however, allocations—particularly for maintenance—remain
                             inadequate. Between 2018 and 2021, average maintenance coverage reached only 45 percent, compared with a
                             planned target of 65 percent.12 This gap is particularly concerning given that flooding and landslides are the most




_For Official Use Only_
                             frequent and damaging hazards affecting Ghana’s roads, with around 117 kilometers impacted by flooding each year.
                             Between 2020 and 2050, floods are projected to cause about US$2.05 billion in discounted direct damages to road
                             assets, according to the Ghana CCDR (2022).13 Ultimately, systematic underspending in road rehabilitation and
                             maintenance has wider economic implications, including higher infrastructure-related transport costs, weaker farm-
                             to-market connectivity, lower agricultural investment, production losses due to poor road conditions, and, over time,
                             higher food prices in Ghana.
                          9. The newly created Road Maintenance Trust Fund (Act 1147, enacted in July 2025) represents a major reform aimed
                             at addressing chronic financing gaps in road maintenance. The Fund is the primary source of financing for
                             rehabilitation and maintenance, covering about 70 percent of maintenance works. It is expected to consolidate existing
                             revenue sources and allocate resources through incentive-based contracts and a formula that considers efficiency and
                             spatial equity. Current revenues derive from fuel levies, tolls, vehicle registration fees, and international transit charges,
                             which are fixed (specific) rather than ad valorem. The absence of automatic inflation adjustments has led to stagnating
                             maintenance revenues, which have also been subject to periodic reallocations to non-maintenance uses. Authorities
                             are considering reinstating road and bridge tolls suspended during the COVID-19 pandemic14. The Road Trust Fund is
                             designed to strengthen efficiency, equity, and accountability by ensuring that revenues are dedicated exclusively to
                             road maintenance. Despite these reforms, the 2025 allocation of GHC2.81 billion (about US$234 million) remains well
                             below estimated annual maintenance needs of approximately US$700 million.15


                           7
                             National Transport Policy. MOT (2020)
                           8
                             Sector Medium-term Development Plan (SMTDP): 2022-2025. MRH. (2022)
                           9
                             Medium-term Expenditure Framework 2024-2027
                           10
                              World Bank InfraSAP database (2021)
                           11
                              MRH, (2022). Sector Medium-term Development Plan (SMTDP): 2022-2025.
                           12
                              Ibidem
                           13
                              Ghana Country Climate and Development Report (2022)
                           14
                              https://citinewsroom.com/2026/03/govt-to-roll-out-electronic-road-tolls-by-end-of-2026/
                           15
                              Ghana Country Climate and Development Report (2022)

                                                                                                                                                      Page 4
                                    The World Bank
                                    Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)


                          10. The GoG developed a road asset management system to strengthen prioritization, planning, and budgeting for
                              maintenance; however, it has not yet been fully operationalized. Under a previous World Bank-supported project,
                              Transport Sector Improvement Project (TSIP, P151026), the road sector-initiated in 2024 reforms to improve asset
                              management performance, including the establishment of a dedicated unit and the development of a Web-based
                              Integrated GIS Road Asset Management System (WIGRAMS). The system is designed to collect and analyze geo-
                              referenced road asset data to support prioritization of interventions, planning and budgeting, and asset valuation.
                              WIGRAMS is intended to replace the existing Excel-based system and harmonize asset data across the three agencies
                              under the Ministry of Roads and Highways (MRH). Once operational, the system is designed to strengthen maintenance
                              planning and align sector practices with the objectives of the Road Maintenance Trust Fund Act and the National
                              Transport Policy (2020). The system is not fully operational at this time. The proposed project seeks to facilitate data
                              collection and implement necessary enhancements to ensure effective road asset management functionality.
                          11. Ghana’s road sector involves multiple institutions with distinct but interlinked mandates. The Ministry of Roads and
                              Highways leads the sector through three implementing agencies: the Department of Feeder Roads, the Department of
                              Urban Roads, and the Ghana Highway Authority, responsible for feeder, urban, and trunk roads, respectively.
                              Historically, the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA), through Ghana Cocoa Board (COCOBOD), financed road
                              construction in cocoa-growing areas, with MRH agencies acting as implementing entities. More recently, Government
                              has returned the mandate of maintaining and financing cocoa roads to the MHR, refocusing COCOBOD on its core
                              mandate of regulating and managing the cocoa sector. Metropolitan, Municipal, and District Assemblies also play a




_For Official Use Only_
                              role in road management under Ghana’s decentralization framework.
                            C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                            Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                            The project Development Objective is: To improve and sustain all-season farm-to-market road connectivity in
                            selected districts of Ghana.

                             Key Results
                          12. Key Results: The following PDO indicators will be considered:
                                PDO Level Indicators
                                •   Millions of people with improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (number, gender -
                                    disaggregated)
                                •   Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (number, gender, -disaggregated)
                                •   Share of feeder roads maintained under the project (percentage)

                           Multicriteria framework project design approach
                          13. The project design adopts a multicriteria framework to strengthen stakeholder participation in decision-making and
                              ensure flexibility for potential scale-up. The approach supports the selection of priority road rehabilitation
                              investments within the GoG’s 5,000 km program, based on key factors including road condition, crop production, and
                              district-level food insecurity . Districts identified through the analysis were grouped into four clusters (see Figure 2) to
                              facilitate efficient implementation. This transparent process, conducted jointly with the GoG, aims to achieve
                              streamlined procurement, faster implementation, and improved contract management.16



                           16
                             This approach is consistent with the GoG’s national development and transport strategies, which prioritize rural and feeder road
                           connectivity to link agricultural production areas to markets, improve access to social services, and support inclusive growth.

                                                                                                                                                           Page 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)




_For Official Use Only_
                                                                    Figure 2: Map of the Four Priority Clusters
                          14. During implementation, the same framework will be used to prioritize and select the feeder roads to be rehabilitated
                              within each cluster. This will be done by mapping key production areas and markets onto the road network to identify
                              the most critical links for maintaining farm-to-market connectivity and supporting food security. Priority will be given
                              to roads where climate disruptions would significantly constrain access between farms and markets. Figure 3 below
                              outlines the three-step analytical approach being used to identify road investments which aligns with Ghana’s strategic
                              priorities and the Government’s objective of reducing food inflation through improved market access:




                                                              Figure 3: The three steps of the prioritization framework




                                                                                                                                                  Page 6
                                    The World Bank
                                    Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)


                                D. Project Description

                                Component 1: Rehabilitation of feeder roads
                          15. The component will finance the rehabilitation of approximately 1,050 km of feeder roads to improve all-weather
                              access from farm-gates to markets across the four priority clusters. It will cover civil works, supervision consultancy
                              services, and implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). Road design surface is estimated using the SPADE-
                              PLUS framework (70 percent bitumen and 30 percent gravel).17 The final location, length, and surfacing type of roads
                              will be confirmed during implementation.
                          16. Road designs will incorporate climate-resilient features—such as bridges, drains, culverts, and scour protection—to
                              reduce vulnerability to floods, heavy rainfall, drought, and temperature extremes, and ensure year-round
                              accessibility.
                          17. All rehabilitated roads will integrate road safety measures, including speed management and design features to
                              protect vulnerable road users, who account for more than 70 percent of road fatalities in rural areas. Based on
                              detailed designs, the project will finance low-cost, high-impact interventions such as pedestrian crossings, rumble
                              strips, and improved signage in settlements along project roads. Roadworks will also incorporate universal
                              accessibility standards and safe pedestrian walkways in urban and semi-urban areas to promote inclusivity.
                          18. The project will support the recruitment and retention of women in road construction and maintenance through




_For Official Use Only_
                              civil works contracts. Bidding documents will include provisions such as minimum targets for women’s employment in
                              medium- and high-skilled jobs, equal pay policies, and anti-harassment and grievance mechanisms to enhance
                              women’s participation and address gender gaps. To support women’s recruitment and retention in civil works
                              contracts, this component will finance certification training delivered by TVET or the Ministry of Roads and Highways
                              Training Center, complemented by mentorship programs to facilitate women’s access to medium- and high-skilled,
                              long-term private sector employment.
                          19. Road rehabilitation will explore opportunities to integrate last-mile fiber optic infrastructure and improve access to
                              warehouses and logistics facilities. As part of the detailed design, assessments will identify feasible locations for
                              installing fiber optic cables to enhance digital connectivity for priority public facilities, including health centers, schools,
                              administrative offices, and police stations. In collaboration with the International Finance Corporation, the road
                              selection process is also expected to also prioritize access to warehouses and logistics facilities within targeted
                              agricultural clusters, where appropriate. Improved connectivity between production areas, markets, and storage
                              facilities is expected to strengthen value chains and support greater capital mobilization for small and medium
                              enterprises (SMEs).

                                Component 2: Road maintenance and support to the road fund reform
                          20. Sub-component 2.1 – Maintenance of the feeder roads rehabilitated under the project: This subcomponent adopts a
                              two-fold financing approach to ensure road maintenance over the life of the project through performance-based
                              contracts, thereby enhancing sustainability.
                                •   Maintenance of rehabilitated roads under Cluster 1 and 2: Maintenance contracts for these clusters will be
                                    domestically financed through a counterpart fund contribution. Subject to agreement, the GoG is expected to
                                    finance maintenance contracts covering approximately 600 km.

                           17
                             SPADE‑PLUS is a World Bank multi‑criteria framework for deciding whether to pave rural, low‑volume roads, incorporating social,
                           environmental, and climate benefits beyond traditional economic analysis. It uses a two‑stage process: prioritization through
                           weighted criteria (SPADE) followed by economic or cost‑effectiveness analysis based on traffic levels.

                                                                                                                                                         Page 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)


                              •   Maintenance of roads rehabilitated under Clusters 3 and 4: IDA financing will support maintenance of
                                  rehabilitated roads under clusters 3 and 4 of approximately 450 km. Subject to government’s approval, the
                                  disbursement of the full IDA funds for the rehabilitated roads will be conditional to the full release of the
                                  counterpart funding by government and payment of the maintenance contracts under cluster 1 and 2 to ensure
                                  total maintenance commitment and sustenance of the road investment.

                          21. Sub-component 2.2 – Support to the Road Fund reform: This subcomponent will finance technical assistance to
                          support the ongoing Road Fund reform and strengthen the use of the existing road asset management tool (WIGRAMS).
                          Building on the recently approved Road Fund Act, it will focus on improving resource mobilization and revenue
                          management. In addition, this support will help the road fund conduct studies on resource mobilization and diversification.
                              22. Collectively, these activities aim to ensure the availability of funds, strengthen the sustainability of feeder road
                                  investments and support a performance-oriented road maintenance system.
                              Component 3: Project Management and Implementation support
                          1. Sub-component 3.1 – Project Management: The component will finance operational costs of the implementing
                             agencies, fiduciary audits, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and training for implementing agencies and contractors
                             to strengthen their capacity to manage and implement maintenance works. It will also support the engagement of a
                             social development specialist to provide technical assistance.




_For Official Use Only_
                          2. Sub-component 3.2 – Strengthening Ghana’s Environmental, Social, Health and Safety institutional capacity for
                             improved regulatory compliance and development outcomes: This subcomponent will finance the strengthening of
                             institutional capacity to monitor and ensure compliance with occupational health and safety (OHS) measures during
                             civil works. It will support the Ghana Environmental Protection Authority (EPA), the Department of Factories
                             Inspectorate (DFI), and the Lands Valuation Division (LVD) to operationalize the new Environmental Assessment
                             Regulations (L.I. 2504), improve capacity for land acquisition and resettlement where necessary for the Project, and
                             enhance OHS oversight in line with national legislation and the Project’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF).
                             These interventions are critical given the high incidence of transport sector-related community and occupational health
                             and safety (C/OHS) risks, including fatalities and serious injuries, and the risk of human and financial costs, including
                             lost time and contractor claims.
                          3. The subcomponent will also support citizen engagement, as well as measures to prevent and mitigate gender-based
                             violence (GBV), including sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH) and violence against children
                             (VAC) risks associated with civil works, along with their monitoring.

                              Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component


                            E. Role of Partners
                          4. The Government of Ghana’s initial project concept envisaged rehabilitating 5,000 km of feeder roads nationwide, of
                             which the project is financing the first 1,050 km. This first phase prioritizes road segments with high crop productivity
                             and poor connectivity, where constraints have significant implications for food inflation and food security. There is a
                             clear opportunity to mobilize additional partnerships to scale up the scope of the project toward Government’s
                             ambition. Such expansion would help achieve larger-scale impacts on agricultural productivity with significant benefits
                             for farmers, consumers, and citizens.
                          5. Development partners and others could act as financiers should the Government seek to expand the project scope
                             by mobilizing additional financing. The World Bank encourages the Government to explore support from other DFIs.


                                                                                                                                                  Page 8
                                 The World Bank
                                 Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                              Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                             No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                       No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          The overall Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC) is assessed as Substantial at Appraisal. Discretely,
                          Environmental, Social, and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) risks are all assessed as
                          Substantial. Key environmental risks and impacts are primarily construction-related and include: (i) dust, noise, and
                          vibration from road works and logistics hub construction; (ii) soil erosion, vegetation loss, and potential impacts on water
                          resources; (iii) generation of solid and hazardous waste, including e-waste from digital infrastructure upgrades; (iv)




_For Official Use Only_
                          pollution risks from fuel storage, machinery, and construction runoff; (v) biodiversity impacts, including potential habitat
                          disturbance or fragmentation—particularly where road alignments cross sensitive areas—and risks of invasive species
                          introduction; (vi) resource efficiency concerns related to high demand for construction materials, water, and energy; and
                          (vii) greenhouse gas emissions from diesel-powered equipment and trucks, electricity use at sites, asphalt production, and
                          embodied carbon in construction materials. Key social risks and impacts anticipated include: (i) land acquisition or
                          restrictions on land use, with potential physical or economic displacement, particularly affecting squatters and
                          encroachers along feeder roads; (ii) impacts on livelihoods, especially for roadside traders dependent on right-of-way
                          corridors; (iii) minor labor influx and associated risks, including potential disruption of local dynamics and risks of SEA/SH;
                          (iv) potential impacts on tangible cultural heritage where project activities intersect with sites of historical or cultural
                          significance; and (v) policy and regulatory interventions such as on the road fund reform that may have disproportionate
                          adverse impacts on vulnerable groups, requiring targeted mitigation to ensure equitable benefits and avoid harm. To
                          manage risks and impacts identified, DFR has prepared an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) outlining
                          their commitment to implement material mitigation measures, a Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP) to ensure
                          meaningful consultation throughout the project lifecycle, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                          and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which will be reviewed, cleared and disclosed prior to completion of Appraisal.
                          The GoG has also prepared a memorandum with estimates for compensation for displacement impacts through IDA. A
                          SEA-SH Response Plan and Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared, reviewed and cleared, and disclosed
                          prior to effectiveness. During implementation, site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and
                          Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared, disclosed, and implemented prior to the commencement of civil works.
                          A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be prepared once the scope of the road fund reform has been
                          fully fleshed out but prior to commencement of the reforms. DFR’s capacity to identify and manage E&S risks and impacts
                          is nascent but developing. A capacity assessment to determine the extent of utilization of Ghana national systems will be
                          completed prior to effectiveness. In addition, the project will embed in its design, targeted support for the Department of
                          Factories Inspectorate (DFI), Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) and the Lands Valuation Division (LVD), to realize
                          the operationalization of the new E&S regulations, strength land acquisition and compensation processes, and improve
                          Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) oversight for effective implementation of the project. In addition, the DFR will staff

                                                                                                                                                    Page 9
                                  The World Bank
                                  Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)


                           the national AIT with social, environmental, and GBV specialists, and add capacity at sub-national levels and within
                           supervision and contractor teams as needed. Institutional-level stakeholder consultations have been completed, with
                           ongoing engagement throughout implementation. A project-wide and workers’ grievance redress mechanism will be
                           established before related activities commence, and initial E&S training will be completed within two months of
                           effectiveness. The project will maintain close supervision and adaptive management, updating instruments and the ESCP
                           as needed to reflect changes in E&S risks and an evolving implementation landscape

                            E. Implementation

                            Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          6. The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Roads and Highways (MRH). The MRH will be responsible for
                             overall project oversight, strategic decision-making, road fund reforms, activities under Component 2, and preparation
                             of the Project Implementation Manual. The project governance structure will include: (a) a steering committee; (b) a
                             dedicated, full-time Project Coordinator (PC) to coordinate the activities of the two implementation teams and report
                             to the World Bank; and (c) two Agency Implementation Teams (AITs), located within the Ministry of Roads and
                             Highways.




_For Official Use Only_
                          7. The Steering Committee (SC) will review and approve annual work plans and budgets, provide policy and program
                             guidance, oversee implementation progress, and ensure coordination among stakeholders. It will be chaired by the
                             Ministry of Roads and Highways (MRH) and will include representatives from the Ministry of Finance (MoF), Lands
                             Commission (LC), Ghana Highway Authority (GHA), Department of Feeder Roads (DFR), Department of Urban Roads
                             (DUR), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA). MoF will support
                             disbursement approvals and Interim Financial Reporting (IFR), in line with its mandate, while the Lands Commission
                             will support land acquisition processes and the EPA will provide guidance and approvals related to environmental
                             compliance, including quarries and borrow pits. The SC will meet quarterly, or as needed. DFR will lead the
                             implementation of Component 1, while MRH will lead Component 2.


                            @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                            CONTACT POINT

                            World Bank
                              Ndeye Diop Diaw Gueye
                              Transport Specialist

                              Ashwini Rekha Sebastian
                              Senior Agriculture Economist

                              Akua Pokuaa Timpabi
                              Transport Specialist

                            Borrower/Client/Recipient



                                                                                                                                              Page 10
                               The World Bank
                               Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)


                           Republic of Ghana

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Ministry of Roads and Highways

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL




_For Official Use Only_
                          Task Team Leader(s):                   Ndeye Diop Diaw Gueye

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:              Daniel Benitez          30-Mar-2026

                          Country/Division Director:             Michelle C. Keane       15-Apr-2026




                                                                                                       Page 11
