Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01440




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
Angola, Botswana, Namibia      P513349                      Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing
                                                            Innovation in Transboundary Waters
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN           08-Apr-2026                  28-May-2026                  Water
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency          GEF Focal Area
Investment Project             Directorate of Water         Permanent Okavango River     International Waters
Financing (IPF)                Resources Management         Basin Water Commission
                               (MAFWLR), Department of      (OKACOM)
                               Water and Sanitation,
                               Office for the
                               Administration of the
                               Cunene Hydroelectric Basin
                               (GABHIC)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to support the operationalization and viability of the CORB Fund towards
sustainable development in the Cubango-Okavango river basin.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   To be decided
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             To be decided

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          10.00

  Total Financing                                                                                               10.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

DETAILS


                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                          Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)



   Non-World Bank Group Financing
     Trust Funds                                                                                                     10.00
       Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                             10.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                     Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                      The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.       The Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB) is one of the world’s most unique free-flowing rivers, crucial to the
sustainable development of Southern Africa. A transboundary basin with a network of river systems traversing through
Angola, Botswana, and Namibia, the CORB is essential to ecosystem services and to the livelihoods of more than a million
people. The Cubango-Okavango stretches for approximately 1,100 Km and is drained by the Cubango (referred to as
Kavango in Namibia and Okavango in Botswana). The Cubango - Okavango River forms the boundary of Namibia and
Angola, and on this stretch is joined by the main tributary, the Cuito, before flowing through the panhandle as it enters
Botswana and spills into the Okavango Delta. The CORB’s low human population density, numerous habitat types, and
intact ecosystems make it one of the most important areas for biodiversity conservation in the world. The Okavango Delta
is one of the largest and most pristine wetlands of the globe. Critically, the Basin also supports the livelihoods of over a
million people, who directly rely on its natural resources and ecosystem services.

2.      The CORB is still relatively underdeveloped, with predominantly rural communities facing limited access to
economic opportunities, to infrastructure, and to basic services. The 30-year civil war in Angola significantly hindered
economic development in the upper catchment, posing challenges to both local livelihoods and ecosystem’s sustainability.
The annual flow regime of the Cubango, when combined with the Cuito’s sustained flows, largely sustains riverine
ecosystems and communities of people living along the lower Cubango-Okavango River, the Okavango Delta, and the
outflowing Thamalakane and Boteti Rivers. These resources are also vital for larger industry, including tourism. Addressing
the underlying drivers of poverty within the Cubango-Okavango River Basin is crucial for securing long-term sustainability
of the basin’s global public goods and contributions to the national development agenda.

3.      Water resources in the Cubango-Okavango River Basin are facing competing demands that jeopardize the
sustainability of livelihoods and ecosystems. In addition to the threats posed by poverty, rapid rural population growth,
commercial-scale resource harvesting, and increasing impacts of climate change in the basin, the CORB’s water resources
face competing demands from urbanization trends in the riparian states; resource-based livelihoods and lack of alternative


                                                                                                                        Page 2



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


livelihood options; expanding tourism; commercial agriculture; and water extraction.1 The current financing in the basin
remains insufficient to address these challenges. The Multi-Sector Investment Opportunities Analysis (MSIOA) conducted
to assist decision-makers in pursuing investments in the basin to address poverty, while preserving the unique ecology
and reinforcing cooperation, indicates that an estimated US$900 million are needed to address key investments in the
basin, in addition to institutional strengthening, and the establishment of a dedicated Endowment Fund.2 Addressing the
impact of water resources challenges require innovations in transboundary water financing to achieve economies of scale
and scope for transboundary basin financing needs that cannot otherwise be accomplished at a national level.

4.      Improved consensus and capacity to implement cooperative water resources management solutions constitute
key priorities for the CORB. Coordinated support both at the national and regional level is critical for successful
transboundary water management in the CORB, including multi-stakeholder engagement in the design of new funding
vehicles, mobilizing new financial instruments, and derisking core aspects of water sector projects. The World Bank has
been supporting OKACOM in the prioritization of resilient livelihoods investments. The investment program will be part
of the CORB Fund and used as an implementation instrument. Furthermore, the World Bank is assisting OKACOM with an
analytical assessment of the potential for the reduction of Greenhouse Gas emissions from the restoration and
management of the wetlands. The World Bank is also supporting the development and implementation of innovative
financing approaches to catalyze private sector capital with concessional financing structures. This project will deepen
and expand that support through the operationalization of the CORB fund, bolstering innovative financing, and enhancing
capacity and collaboration on transboundary water resources management in the basin, which aligns with the region’s
long-term goal of sustainable and equitable economic development.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context

5.      Countries in the Cubango-Okavango River Basin recognize the need to enhance the management of water
resources to achieve resilient development, to protect critical natural resources and enhance livelihoods. The CORB has
a functioning governing body, the Permanent Okavango River Basin Water Commission (OKACOM), established in 1994
by Angola, Botswana, and Namibia. The Commission’s mandate emerges from a shared vision around anticipating and
reducing unintended, unacceptable, and often unnecessary impacts to the resources of the Basin that occur as a result of
uncoordinated resource development and utilization. To do so, it has developed a coherent approach to managing the
River Basin that is based on equitable allocation, sustainable utilization, sound environmental management and the
sharing of benefits.3

6.       The CORB Fund is structured to address the key challenges affecting the basin, whilst catalyzing significant long-
term investments that promote a resilient development trajectory. The CORB Fund was legally registered in Botswana
in December 2019 as a Company Limited by Guarantee. Initial co-funding of approximately US$1.5 million (in the form of
technical, in-kind and financial resources) was secured from Angola, Botswana, Namibia, OKACOM, UK Aid/FCDO (via
CRIDF), The Nature Conservancy (TNC), and USAID Resilient Waters. The Fund aims to provide a vehicle for mobilizing
long-term resources that will enable the countries to provide more coordinated support to local livelihoods and
sustainable resource use. Two investment vehicles form the backbone of the financing structure: (a) the Sinking Fund and
(b) the Endowment / Impact Investment Fund.4 The Fund will distribute resources from an independent endowment and

1 World Bank. 2019. “The Cubango-Okavango River Basin Multi-Sector Investment Opportunities Analysis: Summary Report.” WB, Washington, DC.
2 Ibid.,
3 OKACOM, CRIDF, The Nature Conservancy, 2021. “Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB) Fund, Value Proposition: 2021”.
4 (a) the Sinking Fund – approximately US$20 M, financed through bilateral and multilateral donors, including contributions from the three MSs and

OKACOM development partners, designed for a medium-term period (5–7 years) to cover Fund operationalization and initial interventions; and (b)
the Endowment Fund – approximately US$250 M, to be raised from various sources.

                                                                                                                                              Page 3



                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


sinking fund to: (i) facilitate interventions designed to conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem functions; (ii)
enhance equitable and socially just livelihoods; and (iii) ensure the environmentally sound and socially responsible
development of the infrastructure and natural resources of the Cubango-Okavango River Basin.

7.       Identifying innovative financing mechanisms is crucial to ensure the long-term sustainability of the CORB Fund,
and to realize significant regional benefits. The proposed project will enable the consolidation and operationalization of
the CORB Fund and its viability. In the context of the proposed Project, support to the operationalization of the CORB Fund
will be instrumental for the preparation of projects on the CORB Fund Pillars (i.e., Livelihood resilience and human
development; Sustainable ecosystems and biodiversity; Inclusive nature-based tourism & green enterprise; and Water,
agriculture and cooperative infrastructure), as well as strengthening the coordination, management, and communication
between all the basin stakeholders, thus enhancing strategies to raise additional funding. The CORB Fund can become a
regional financial institution for cross-border financing needs with strong governance and decision-making capabilities,
with a centralized structure to coordinate the financing of national projects that impact a region, and the capacity to raise
and channel innovative climate financing through one vehicle. The Fund can then achieve economies of scale and scope
for transboundary basin financing needs that cannot otherwise be accomplished at a national level. To unlock significant
financing for the basin, the Fund needs to raise a sizeable equity base from the three sovereign owners and possibly third
parties, such as development funds and donor agencies, to enable the Fund to borrow and offer other financial services.

8.      The project reflects an incremental reasoning by enabling cooperation and sustainable and resilient livelihoods
and development in the CORB basin from a transboundary perspective, enabling investments to preserve the natural
resource base that underpin the basin's ecosystems and livelihoods, and which otherwise would not have been possible
from a single-country perspective. The project will also strengthen OKACOM’s ability to facilitate sustainable
management of the CORB through an approach that emphasizes scaling up, donor collaboration and multi-stakeholder
engagement, as well as implementation of lessons learned and best practices in governance and approaches to the Fund’s
long-term sustainability. This includes the initial capitalization of the CORB Fund, including building capacities for
beneficiaries of the CORB Fund, and initiation of funding concepts for investments in transboundary projects via CORB
Fund. Project outcomes include endowment seed capital matched by different sources.

 Relationship to CPF

9.        The proposed project is closely aligned with the CPF of the three participating countries. The project aligns with
Botswana's 2016-2020 Country Partnership Framework (CPF), aimed at addressing national priorities of eradicating abject
poverty, reducing inequality, and promoting job creation;5 with Angola’s upcoming CPF, focused on enhancing the quality
of life of the population and equipping individuals to take a greater role in the development of the country, in addition to
enhancing regional public goods and strengthening resilience, climate adaptation and water security, as highlighted in the
2022 Angola Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR);6 and with Namibia’s 2025-2029 CFP7 focused on tackling
poverty and inequality, and adaptation investments in water systems to reduce the negative impact of climate shocks on
the economy and its people.




5 Diop,Makhtar; Chen,Guangzhe; Imnadze,Elene; Velev,Ivan. Botswana - Country partnership framework. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
6 World Bank. 2023. Angola - First Green, Resilient, Inclusive Growth, and Diversification Development Policy Loan. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
7 World Bank. Namibia - Country Partnership Framework for the Period of FY25-FY29. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.



                                                                                                                                               Page 4



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


    C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective is to support the operationalization and viability of the CORB Fund towards
    sustainable development in the Cubango-Okavango river basin.


  Key Results (From PCN)
The PDO level indicators expected by the project are:
•      CORB Fund operational (Y/N)8
•      CORB Fund Projects prepared and approved for implementation (Number)

10. The project’s indicators and associated measurement methodology will be further developed during the
preparatory stage of the project, including an indicator to track fundraising success during the CORB’s capitalization
phase, and GEF Core and Sub-Indicators.9

 D. Concept Description
11.     The proposed project will enable the consolidation and operationalization of the CORB Fund. The activities that
the project will finance are grouped in four main components, focused on maximizing the development impact of projects
in the CORB through the operationalization of the CORB Fund, targeted technical assistance on priority areas, and
strengthened institutional capacity to secure financing.

12.      Component 1. CORB Fund operationalization (US$1.72 million). The Fund has a clear governance structure and
roadmap to full capitalization. While its operating principles are in place, the project will support full operationalization
through governance and institutional-strengthening activities. This component will support the capacity, consolidation
and expansion of the CORB Fund as an innovative financial mechanism, and advance collaboration towards its long-term
sustainability. The component will complement the funding provided to the CORB Fund by other development partners
(i.e., UNDP and European Union), focusing on supporting the CORB Fund’s implementation through (a) the establishment
and rolling-out of the Fund’s governance structure, capacity, operations and systems to ensure effective functioning; (b)
the implementation of stakeholder coordination to enable the CORB Fund’s long-term sustainability10; and (c) support to
the CORB Fund communication and knowledge management, including engagement in the International Waters Learning
Exchange and Resource Network (IW:LEARN) to foster knowledge exchange with other transboundary basins.

13.     Component 2. Enabling innovative financing in the CORB (US$6.95 million). This component will enable
innovative financing in the CORB to address the priority areas identified by Angola, Botswana and Namibia, laying the
foundation for larger/more complex investments in the future. The component’s activities will focus on two
complementary areas of support: (a) preparing the CORB Fund Financing Roadmap as well as project concepts for potential
investment; and (b) capitalizing the CORB Fund Endowment. As part of this component, the project will develop
investment-ready project packages to attract co-financing from donors, development banks, and private sector investors,
including the implementation of technical review and quality assurance processes to ensure alignment with CORB Fund
objectives, environmental and social safeguards. The project will ensure the inclusion of gender aspects and Indigenous

8
  The PAD will include a definition of ‘operational’, for the PDO indicator to be assessed based on key aspects of the CORB Fund’s functioning (e.g.:
the Fund’s governance and staffing are in place, the operational systems of the Fund have been implemented, among others).
9 GEF Indicator No. 7, “Shared water ecosystems under new or improved cooperative management”; and Sub-indicators 7.1 “Level of

Transboundary Diagnostic Analysis and Strategic Action Program (TDA/SAP) formulation and implementation”; 7.3. “Level of National/Local reforms
and active participation of Inter-Ministerial Committees”; 7.4. “Level of engagement in IW: LEARN through participation and delivery of key
products”, and Indicator No. 11, on total number of direct beneficiaries of the project disaggregated by sex.
10 In addition to Member States (Angola, Botswana and Namibia), CORB Fund stakeholders include statutory bodies, multilateral and bi-lateral

agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), private sector civil society and community organizations.

                                                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


Peoples and Local Communities (IPLCs), as well as beneficiaries and other stakeholders in the design and implementation
of CORB investments and governance. Project activities will identify and prioritize pipeline projects in close collaboration
with Angola, Botswana, and Namibia, based on basin-wide needs assessments and strategic priorities. Activities include
the engagement with the Ministers of Finance of riparian countries, who are key to ensure high level buy-in and
engagement in the preparation of the Fund’s long-term capitalization and development into the role as a regional financial
institution.

14.      Component 3. Enhanced livelihoods and biodiversity in the Cubango-Okavango River Basin (US$0.7 million).
Building on past and ongoing analytical work supported by CIWA, this component will support targeted technical
assistance to maximize the impact of livelihood interventions and biodiversity conservation in the Basin, focused on two
priority areas: a) the economics of biodiversity; and (b) capacity building for integrating biodiversity as part of planning
and investment in the Okavango basin. Activities under this component will inform and strengthen livelihood
interventions and biodiversity conservation in the CORB through applied technical assistance, basin-wide knowledge
generation, and targeted capacity building, contributing to enhance the impact of the future project pipeline linked to
these areas.11

15.     Component 4. Project management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$0.63 million). This component will
support project management costs, the establishment of project management systems, as well as the project’s Monitoring
and Evaluation (M&E).

16.      Diverse stakeholders will be involved in the implementation of the project. Counterparts from Member States
that will be involved in the project’s Governance will come from the four Statutory Organs of OKACOM (OKACOM Forum
of Ministers, the Council of Commissioners, the Okavango Basin Steering Committee, and members from the five
Specialized Technical Committees). At the national level, Ministers of Finance from Member States will be actively
engaged. The private sector will also be engaged to mobilize its expertise towards professional fund management for the
CORB Fund, and towards unlocking private capital through blended financing, green-/ blue-/ sustainability-linked loans
and bonds, and disaster risk insurance, among other areas. A diversity of local stakeholders will also be engaged as part
of Component 3 of the project, which will support targeted technical assistance to maximize the impact of livelihood
interventions and biodiversity conservation in the CORB. Stakeholder roles will be detailed during the project’s
preparation, including the project’s approach to engaging IPLCs.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                          Policies                                                                 Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                           Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



11 Activities will consider the targets set out in the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF), adopted during COP 15.



                                                                                                                                              Page 6



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Lars Anders Jagerskog
 Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

 Diego Juan Rodriguez
 Lead Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Directorate of Water Resources Management (MAFWLR)

 Department of Water and Sanitation

 Office for the Administration of the Cunene Hydroelectric Basin (GABHIC)

Implementing Agencies
 Permanent Okavango River Basin Water Commission (OKACOM)

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Lars Anders Jagerskog, Diego Juan Rodriguez

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Soma Ghosh Moulik                      24-Sep-2025

Country Director:                       Maryanne Sharp                         22-Oct-2025




                                                                                                           Page 7



                                                                                                   Official Use Only
The World Bank
Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)




                                                                                                      Page 8



                                                                                              Official Use Only
