Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   South Africa's Infrastructure Modernization and Job Creation DPL (P513580)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDIC00262




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      South Africa's Infrastructure Modernization and Job Creation DPL (P513580)


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
 BASIC INFORMATION


 A. Basic Project Data

 Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                               South Africa's Infrastructure Modernization and Job
 South Africa                   P513580
                                                               Creation DPL
 Region                         Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)           Financing Instrument
 EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                          Macroeconomics, Trade          Development Policy
                                21-May-2026
 AFRICA                                                        and Investment                 Financing (DPF)
 Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
 National Treasury              National Treasury

Proposed Development Objective(s)
 The objective is to support the country's effort to modernize infrastructure and create jobs by increasing the efficiency
 and sustainability of electricty supply; improving freight transport services; and enhancing water and sanitation
 services.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
 Financing (US$, Millions)


 Maximizing Finance for Development

 Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
 Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               Yes

 SUMMARY
   Total Financing                                                                                              1,500.00

 DETAILS
   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                             1,500.00
     World Bank Lending                                                                                         1,500.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue



                                                                                                                       Page 1



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       South Africa's Infrastructure Modernization and Job Creation DPL (P513580)



 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context


1.       South Africa’s macroeconomic framework is adequate for the proposed operation. This assessment is based on
the government’s continuous commitment to prudent macroeconomic policies and structural reforms, including in the
energy, transport, and water sectors supported by this operation, which are key to unleashing the private sector growth
and job creation. Fiscal risks are mitigated by improved revenue collection, effective expenditure management, and strong
public financial management. Debt sustainability risks are contained as domestic debt constitutes almost 90 percent of
overall public debt. This assessment is reinforced by the credibility of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), a flexible
exchange rate regime, and a stable financial system.
 Relationship to CPF

2.      The proposed stand-alone Development Policy Loan (DPL) supports South Africa’s efforts to achieve inclusive
growth by tackling infrastructure constraints, the primary barrier to job creation. It builds upon the ongoing collaboration
between the World Bank and the government, including three DPLs since 2022, the 2025 Metro Trading Services Program
for Results, and a comprehensive technical assistance and analytical program. Additionally, it advances regional and
corporate priorities related to job creation, energy access, improved living standards for vulnerable groups, and
environmental sustainability and resilience. Preparation has involved comprehensive coordination with development
partners such as Germany, Japan, the OPEC Fund, and the African Development Bank (AFDB) to ensure a cohesive strategy.
 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 The objective is to support the country's effort to modernize infrastructure and create jobs by increasing the
 efficiency and sustainability of electricty supply; improving freight transport services; and enhancing water and
 sanitation services.

  Key Results

3.      This operation advances targeted structural reforms to improve the reliability, cost efficiency, and access of core
services—electricity, transport, and water—critical to firms’ competitiveness and the livelihoods and welfare of poor
and vulnerable households in South Africa. These improvements will generate additional jobs. At the sectoral level,
improved electricity supply, including through more renewable energy, will be enabled through the launch of a transparent
and competitive wholesale electricity market, mobilization of private investments to expand the transmission lines, and
the addition of household connections as municipalities enhance their distribution performance. Freight transport will
gain from allocating slots on major rail corridors to licensed private train operators, as well as greater investments in rail
and port infrastructure through concessions and foreign capital. Finally, water services will benefit from stronger sector
coordination and heightened competition, including from private sector service providers.
 D. Concept Description

4.     Leveraging on recent progress achieved by the government, this DPL is designed to sustain and deepen the
reforms in the electricity and transport sectors, while expanding its focus to address the pressing challenges facing the
water sector. It is structured around three mutually reinforcing pillars:



                                                                                                                          Page 2



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        South Africa's Infrastructure Modernization and Job Creation DPL (P513580)


    •   Pillar 1: Increase the efficiency and sustainability of electricity supply by promoting greater competition and
        transparency in the energy sector; scaling up investments in transmission; and improving performance in
        distribution.
    •   Pillar 2: Improve freight transport services by introducing competition among rail operators; promoting private
        investment and efficiency through Public-Private Partnership (PPP) models and increasing transparency to attract
        private investment.
    •   Pillar 3: Enhance water supply and sanitation service delivery by strengthening regulatory oversight and
        accountability and facilitating the entry of new water service providers, while upgrading long-term planning and
        execution of investment in national bulk water infrastructure.
 E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

 Poverty and Social Impacts


5.       Enhanced electricity, transport, and water services will improve firms’ competitiveness, boosting economic
growth and job creation. At the same time, the reforms are expected to benefit households at the bottom of the
distribution through four main channels: (i) enhanced reliability, quality, and coverage of basic services; (ii) a lower cost of
living driven by reduced energy, transport, and food prices; (iii) higher and more stable labor income resulting from
increased productivity and labor demand in both formal and informal firms, including SMEs; and (iv) greater resilience to
economic and climate-related shocks through more reliable infrastructure and improved long-term investment planning.
 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects


6.       South Africa has a robust legislative system for assessing and managing impacts on its environment, forests, and
natural resources. The reforms supported by this DPL yield either positive or neutral impacts on the environment,
forests, and other natural resources. Pillar 1 is designed to enhance the efficiency and sustainability of electricity supply
by advancing the adoption of renewable energy sources. Additionally, increased private sector investment in transmission
infrastructure is expected to support both climate mitigation and resilience objectives. Pillar 2 focuses on facilitating the
development of more efficient railway systems, thereby encouraging a shift from truck transport, which is associated with
higher pollution levels, towards rail, which represents a cleaner alternative. Pillar 3 will strengthen water and sanitation
services by increasing accountability and upgrading infrastructure, resulting in environmental and climate improvements.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Jacques Morisset
   Lead Economist

   Mirlan Aldayarov
   Lead Energy Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient


                                                                                                                           Page 3



                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     South Africa's Infrastructure Modernization and Job Creation DPL (P513580)


 National Treasury

Implementing Agencies
 National Treasury

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Jacques Morisset, Mirlan Aldayarov

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Rafael Munoz Moreno                       10-Feb-2026

Country Director:                       Satu Kristiina Kahkonen                   26-Feb-2026




                                                                                                        Page 4



                                                                                                Official Use Only
