Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Jammu And Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic And Tourism Development Project (P513389)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 10/22/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05253




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 23, 2025                                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Jammu And Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic And Tourism Development Project (P513389)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P513389                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       SLETD                       2026

                     Operation Name            Jammu and Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic and Tourism Development Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     India                     India                                   SOUTH ASIA                   Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                                                    Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Government of India       Tourism Department                      07-Nov-2025                  18-Dec-2025


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     04-Sep-2025               575,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To strengthen resilient service delivery and promote local jobs in selected tourism destinations


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed project aims to foster sustainable tourism in selected destination supporting the creation of local jobs,
                     prioritizing environmental stewardship, and strengthening community resilience. By developing unique tourism
                     offerings that respect natural assets and empower local communities, the initiative seeks to drive inclusive economic
                     growth, thereby creating conditions for sustained private sector participation.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Jammu And Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic And Tourism Development Project (P513389)



                     The proposed Project focuses on selected demonstration destinations across Jammu and Kashmir (J&K), reflecting a
                     diverse range of ecological, topographical, and social contexts. Many sites are adjacent to forests or ecologically
                     sensitive areas and are subject to seasonal climatic variations such as snowfall and monsoon rains with risks of
                     landslides.

                     Socially, the sites are inhabited by a mix of rural communities, including settled and pastoral tribal communities and
                     other traditionally marginalized groups. Access to basic services varies across locations, with more pronounced gaps in
                     remote areas. Historic assets and traditional architecture are present at several sites.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The proposed Project will be managed through a two-tier institutional structure, comprising a high-level Steering
                     Committee with representations from key government departments, private sector actors, and subject matter experts,
                     who will provide strategic oversight, facilitate interdepartmental coordination, and ensure accountability. It will include
                     a Project Management Unit (PMU) responsible for overall coordination and environmental and social compliance.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Substantial
                     The environmental risk for the proposed Project is rated as Substantial. This rating reflects the type, scale, and



Public Disclosure
                     location of proposed activities, the sensitivity of the environmental setting, the envisioned types of investments
                     based on tourism planning studies, and the current capacity of the implementing entities. The proposed Project
                     follows a framework approach. None of the destinations is foreseen to be located in critical habitat areas, and future
                     investments will be guided by planning studies and the tiered approach to accessibility. Key environmental risks
                     include potential construction-related pollution, slope destabilization, erosion, impact on vegetation and habitats, air
                     and noise emissions during construction, unmanaged solid waste from tourism and civil works, and occupational
                     health and safety concerns. While these direct impacts may not be significant individually, the uncertainties about the
                     cumulative environmental pressures from tourism activity across multiple sites have been factored into the overall
                     risk rating
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risks for the proposed Project are rated as ‘Substantial’. This is due to the vulnerability of local communities in
                     the proposed destinations to tourism traffic, labor influx, limited agency of local service providers, and low client
                     capacities. Tourist footfall linked to proposed Project activities would increase pressure on existing resources, apart
                     from risks to their health and safety. The framework approach will ensure that investments are appropriately
                     designed to so they do not pose adverse social impacts and remain within the absorptive capacity of the local
                     community. Local communities may also be impacted due to private land acquisition and involuntary resettlement
                     owing to the creation and expansion of existing service infrastructure and restrictions on traditional access to
                     resources and seasonal use of landscapes by pastoral communities practising transhumance.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                         Page 3 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Jammu And Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic And Tourism Development Project (P513389)



                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                     Relevant

                      An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared. It will include screening procedures,
                      roles and responsibilities, environmental and social codes of practice, and standard Environmental and Social
                      Management Plans (ESMPs). Subproject-specific Environment and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and ESMPs will
                      be prepared (once locations and technical details are confirmed), disclosed and implemented thereafter. Terms of
                      Reference will be reviewed by the Bank. A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will also be
                      prepared to guide the downstream investments and area-development plans. By appraisal, the Borrower will prepare
                      an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), and an ESMF including
                      Labor Management Procedures (LMP), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), Tribal Development Framework (TDF),
                      Cultural Heritage Management Framework (CHMF), and a GBV prevention action plan.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                          Relevant

                      The proposed Project stakeholders are likely to include different J&K government agencies, urban and rural local
                      bodies, local communities and collectives, civil society organizations, tourists, tourism service providers, and media.
                      The SEP will include measures to ensure the participation of local communities in the preparation of plans, as well as
                      proactive disclosure of project-related information. It will also strengthen/establish grievance mechanisms for
                      stakeholders to raise project-related grievances, including SEA/SH, and seek timely redress. A perception survey of
                      demand and supply-side stakeholders is proposed to strengthen local-level planning and oversight. A longitudinal
                      study of tourist experiences is also planned to establish a baseline and assess the proposed Project’s impact from the



Public Disclosure
                      tourist perspective.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                Relevant

                      The proposed Project will involve direct workers (PMU staff) and contracted workers. Key labor-related risks include
                      Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) during civil works, labor influx, and inadequate working conditions, apart from
                      the risk of child labor. To address these risks, the Borrower will prepare an LMP, detailing provisions on fair
                      employment, working conditions, OHS, code of conduct (including GBV, SEA/SH), and worker grievance redress.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                 Relevant

                      During construction, potential impacts include dust and noise emissions, improper disposal of construction waste, soil
                      erosion, and runoff. During the operational phase, tourism activity may lead to increased sewage and solid waste
                      generation, and pressure on local services. The ESMF will include measures to prevent and control pollution, promote
                      sustainable waste management, and ensure sound construction practices to reduce the environmental footprints of
                      tourists.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                 Relevant

                      Proposed Project activities may pose risks to local communities, such as increased heavy vehicle traffic, noise, dust,
                      slope instability, and excavations. The design of public facilities will integrate safety, accessibility, and disaster and




                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                          Page 4 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Jammu And Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic And Tourism Development Project (P513389)



                      climate resilience considerations. The ESMF will provide guidance on managing construction site safety, traffic
                      management, and emergency preparedness. The proposed Project will also address risks of GBV and SEA

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      Likely investments relate to the improvement of existing service delivery or the creation of new assets on land owned
                      by government agencies and local bodies. Some investments are likely to result in the acquisition of private lands and
                      temporary or permanent resettlement impacts, including on customary grazing grounds and routes used by pastoral
                      communities. An RPF will assess potential resettlement impacts and propose mitigation action, including procedures
                      for screening investments, assessing the scale of physical and economic displacement, and access restrictions. The
                      RPF will guide the preparation of site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), with procedures for setting up a
                      Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for project-affected people and monitoring RAP implementation.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                 Relevant
                      Resources

                      The selected demonstration destinations situated near ecologically sensitive areas, critical habitats, and Ramsar
                      wetland sites support a diverse array of flora and fauna. Activities near key ecological assets will be required to
                      comply with existing management plans. Investments located near sensitive habitats such as wetlands and forests
                      could lead to habitat disturbance, vegetation loss, or disruption to local bird populations. The ESMF will include
                      screening criteria and mitigation guidance, and subproject-specific ESIAs/ESMPs will assess and address potential
                      impacts on biodiversity




Public Disclosure
                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                            Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The tribal population in the region corresponds to less than five percent. Some potential tourist destinations may
                      have tribal settlements, customary pastures, and seasonal routes accessed by nomadic communities, with potential
                      access restrictions and livelihood losses. A TDF will be prepared to ensure that meaningful and appropriate
                      consultations are held with tribal communities in such areas and support will be provided when required. Measures
                      will be outlined to ensure screening and avoidance of investments in areas customarily accessed by pastoralist
                      communities and to minimize other adverse impacts. The proposed Project does not foresee any permanent, material
                      loss of access to land or other resources that may require Free, Prior, and Informed-Consent (FPIC).

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                      Relevant

                      Some of the tourism sites are known for their rich historical and architectural heritage. The proposed development
                      may be around some of these physical resources. There may also be undocumented or community-valued heritage
                      features at risk during excavation or construction. The ESMF and CHMF will include procedures for heritage
                      screening, chance find procedures, and recommend measures for avoidance, protection, or integration into project
                      design

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                Not Currently Relevant




                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Jammu And Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic And Tourism Development Project (P513389)



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 Yes

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             No



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The Borrower will prepare and disclose a set of environmental and social instruments prior to appraisal to assess and
                     manage the proposed Project’s potential risks and impacts, particularly given that specific subproject locations and
                     technical details are not yet defined. A framework approach will be adopted to enable early-stage risk management
                     while allowing for flexibility during implementation. The core instrument to be prepared is the ESMF. The ESMF will



Public Disclosure
                     provide procedures for environmental and social screening, risk classification, mitigation, and monitoring, as well as
                     institutional roles and responsibilities. It will also include LMPs, environmental and social codes of practice, and
                     standard ESMPs for different types of potential investments. It will establish criteria for determining when site-specific
                     ESIAs, ESMPs, and RAPs will be required. The following site-specific instruments will be prepared by the Borrower
                     during project implementation, once subproject sites and designs are confirmed:
                     •        LMP (part of ESMF): Will outline terms and conditions of employment, occupational health and safety
                     measures, and grievance mechanisms for workers. A Code of Conduct addressing GBV, and SEA / SH will be adopted for
                     all project workers.
                     •        RFP (part of ESMF): Will address potential land-related risks to guide any land acquisition, use of public or
                     common land, or access restrictions. The RPF will outline eligibility, valuation, consultation, and compensation
                     procedures, and define requirements for preparing RAPs during implementation, where needed.
                     •        TDF (part of ESMF): Will be developed to ensure appropriate engagement and equitable benefit-sharing with
                     Scheduled Tribes and other Indigenous Peoples present in project areas. It will outline measures to safeguard
                     traditional livelihoods, identity, and customary land uses.
                     •        SEP: Will ensure meaningful and inclusive engagement with stakeholders throughout the project lifecycle. The
                     SEP will include a functioning GRM accessible to all stakeholders, including communities, workers, and vulnerable
                     groups.
                     •        ESCP: Will consist of all agreed actions, timelines, and responsibilities.

                     All instruments will be disclosed prior to Appraisal.

                     Site-specific instruments (e.g., ESMPs, ESIAs, RAPs) will be prepared and disclosed for each investment.

                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Jammu And Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic And Tourism Development Project (P513389)




                     The World Bank’s due diligence will include the review of these instruments, terms of reference of critical
                     consultancies, assessment of borrower capacity, site visits, and consultations with key stakeholders.

                     In addition, SESA will address cumulative and strategic risks associated with tourism development across a wide
                     geographic landscape. It will be initiated during the first year of project implementation and will inform long-term
                     planning and sustainability of the tourism sector.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Rosanna Nitti                         Title:          Senior Urban Specialist

                      Email:                  rnitti@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433



Public Disclosure
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                                                 Rosanna Nitti

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                                        Pyush Dogra

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                                               Swati Dogra




                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 7
