Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 10/14/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05225




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 20, 2025                                                                                           Page 1 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P513349                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)     CORB-FIT                    2026

                     Operation Name            Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Eastern and Southern      Angola, Botswana, Namibia              EASTERN AND                 Water
                     Africa                                                           SOUTHERN AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Directorate of Water Permanent Okavango River Basin              08-Apr-2026                 28-May-2026
                     Resources              Water Commission (OKACOM)
                     Management
                     (MAFWLR),
                     Department of Water



Public Disclosure
                     and Sanitation, Office
                     for the
                     Administration of the
                     Cunene Hydroelectric
                     Basin (GABHIC)

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     01-Oct-2025               10,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective is to support the operationalization of the Cubango-Okavango river basin (CORB)
                     Fund and the implementation of cooperative transboundary water management for development in the basin.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No



                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                   Page 2 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Cubango-Okavango river basin (CORB) is a hydrologically complex, and deeply interconnected system which
                     highlights the importance of transboundary solutions. Community livelihoods, ranging from artisanal fisheries to small-
                     scale agriculture in all three riparian states (Angola, Namibia and Botswana) depend on the CORB’s floodplains, rivers,
                     wetlands and other natural resources. These resources are also vital for larger industry, including tourism. Water
                     resources in the CORB are facing competing demands that jeopardize the sustainability of livelihoods and ecosystems. In
                     addition to the threats posed by poverty, rapid rural population growth, and climate change, the CORB’s water
                     resources face demands from urbanization trends; resource-based livelihoods; expanding tourism; commercial
                     agriculture; and water extraction. Addressing these challenges require innovations in transboundary water financing to
                     achieve economies of scale and scope for transboundary basin financing needs that cannot otherwise be accomplished
                     at a national level. The project will support the operationalization of the CORB Fund and the implementation of
                     cooperative transboundary water resources management in the basin. The operationalization of the CORB Fund will be
                     instrumental to enable a regional funding mechanism for cross-border financing needs with strong governance and
                     decision-making capabilities, and with capacity to raise and channel financing from a diverse set of stakeholders. Project
                     support includes the preparation of viable project concepts on the CORB Fund pillars, as well as strengthening the
                     coordination, management, and communication between all the stakeholders involved in the basin, thus enhancing
                     strategies to raise additional funding. Component 1 focuses on the CORB Fund’s operationalization. This component will
                     support the consolidation and expansion of the CORB Fund as an innovative financial mechanism, and advance
                     collaboration towards its long-term sustainability. It includes (1.1.) the establishment and implementation of the CORB
                     Fund’s governance, operational tools, and systems, and (1.2.) the mplementation of stakeholder coordination for long-
                     term sustainability of the CORB Fund . Component 2 focuses on enabling innovative financing in the CORB. This




Public Disclosure
                     component will enable innovative financing in the CORB to address the priority areas identified by Angola, Botswana
                     and Namibia, laying the foundation for larger/more complex investments in the future. It includes (2.1.) the preparation
                     of CORB Fund financing roadmap and concepts for investment, and (2.2.) the capitalization of the CORB Fund
                     endowment. Component 3 focuses on enhanced livelihoods and biodiversity in the Cubango-Okavango river basin.
                     Building on past and ongoing analytical work supported by CIWA, this component will support targeted technical
                     assistance to maximize the impact of livelihood interventions and biodiversity conservation in the Basin. It includes (3.1)
                     the implementation of the Basin-wide economics of biodiversity, and (3.2.) capacity building for integrating biodiversity
                     values into planning and investment decisions.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project, which is a technical assistance, will focus on designing and prioritizing activities (not funded by this project)
                     to be implemented within the Cubango-Okavango River Basin. The topographic extent of the Cubango-Okavango Basin
                     comprises approximately 700,000 km2. Flowing from the Angolan highlands, the Cuito and Cubango Rivers meet to
                     form the Cubango-Okavango along the border of Namibia and Angola before flowing through the panhandle and spilling
                     into the Okavango Delta in Botswana. The Cubango-Okavango river basin is internationally important for its biodiversity
                     and biological productivity and the largest Ramsar site in the world. It has a variety of habitats that is globally unique
                     such as the Okavango delta and wildlife rich wetlands which is home to a significant number of rare and endangered
                     species, although the delta has only a few endemic species. The wetland environment of the delta provides a staging
                     post for birds migrating to southern Africa. In Namibia and Botswana, a part of the basin’s population is directly
                     dependent on surface water resources, while other parts rely on groundwater resources. In each country, the basin
                     populations are remote relative to the countries’ capital cities and main centers of economic activity and this is

                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                         Page 3 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                     reflected in social development indicators in the basin that are lower than the national figures. In general, the people of
                     the basin are poorer, less healthy and less educated than other groups in their respective countries.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented by the Cubango-Okavango river basin (CORB) fund Secretariate established within
                     Okavango River Basin Water Commission (OKACOM) Secretariate. The Secretariat’s tasks will include general project
                     management, procurement, financial management, environment and social standards compliance, monitoring and
                     evaluation, and reporting. The Secretariat will be headed by an Executive Director and a Procurement Officer, a
                     Financial Management Officer, an Environmental and Social Officer, and a Monitoring and Evaluation Officer. The UNDP
                     through GEF funding is supporting the OKACOM Strategic Action Plan, which includes supporting OKACOM to undertake
                     various environmental studies including among other a strategic environmental assessment (SEA) focusing on existing
                     plans, programs and potential downstream development options in the river basin. The SEA will include the
                     development of transboundary environmental guidelines, a monitoring framework and forecasting water needs for
                     water needs for the watershed. OKACOM has some experience with World Bank projects, linked to the implementation
                     of the Regional Climate Resilience Program (RCRP) (180171). The overall E&S performance rating for the RCRP project is
                     currently Moderately Satisfactory. The institutional environmental and social risk management capacity will need to be
                     further assessed as part of project preparation, and the corresponding strengthening measures defined in the project’s
                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) by Appraisal.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial



Public Disclosure
                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating is substantial at concept stage and will be re-assessed during appraisal once additional
                     information becomes available. The project is supporting technical assistance aimed at (i) establishing financing
                     mechanism to support activities under Component 3 (ii) institutional support to OKACOM and (iii) designing a
                     livelihoods and biodiversity enhancement program to be considered for future funding. The project will not support
                     physical investments. While the project supported TA activities will not have a direct impact, the potential
                     downstream activities will be implemented in a globally unique and sensitive ecosystem – the Cubango-Okavango
                     River Basin, and therefore, may have significant adverse environment impacts if not properly managed. Downstream
                     activities have not yet been defined and will only be known during implementation but may include provision of
                     potable water and sanitation, fisheries and agriculture, efficient cookstoves, fire control, ecological restoration,
                     reduction of sediment runoff, eco-tourism and basin wide conservation initiatives among others. Impacts may include
                     (i) loss of biodiversity and sensitive habitats, (ii) impacts on hydrology and environmental flows, (iii) water pollution,
                     (iv) introduction of alien invasives, (v) transboundary pollution and (vi) loss of cultural heritage status. The
                     implementation of activities under component 3 is however anticipated at aiming to enhance biodiversity
                     conservation by addressing current impact. Environmental and social screening of the prioritized investments will be
                     required to ensure the elements of the enhancement program, the financing mechanism and the institutional support
                     meet the requirements of the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). The Terms of Reference for the consulting
                     services preparing the TA activities under Component 2 and 3 will take into account relevant Environment and Social
                     Standards (ESS) under the ESF and will be publicly disclosed.


                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project’s social risk rating is Substantial. This is primarily due to potential impacts on livelihoods of downstream
                     activities, the need for community engagement, and the project’s transboundary context within the CORB. While the
                     exact nature of downstream activities are not yet defined, they may trigger changes in natural resource management
                     practices, potentially affecting access to resources and traditional livelihoods for communities dependent on the
                     basin's resources. Given that the focus of downstream activities will be on the CORB, which supports the livelihoods
                     of over a million people, there is a risk of disproportionately impacting in an adverse manner the most vulnerable
                     groups among the population who rely on the basin's resources, along with the risk of elite capture of benefits. Based
                     on the currently available information, however, the anticipated level of social risk of the downstream impacts
                     associated with the technical assistance activities. The project's emphasis on identifying and prioritizing pipeline
                     downstream projects in close collaboration between Angola, Botswana, and Namibia will be crucial to minimize and
                     mitigate any localized adverse impacts. The project therefore includes activities to strengthen coordination between
                     OKACOM, Member States, donors, and implementing partners. The transboundary nature of the project and the
                     involvement of multiple stakeholders could lead to, real or perceived, inequitable distribution of benefits if not
                     managed effectively. SEP will be a crucial instrument to enable effective and inclusive consultation process. It will be
                     prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed prior to Appraisal. Mitigation measures will include establishing clear
                     communication channels. The social risk rating may be revisited by Appraisal if information indicating that the
                     downstream social impacts may be different based on the available information.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage



Public Disclosure
                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant. The activities directly supported may not have a direct impact but the potential downstream
                      activities under sub-component 2.1 and sub-component 3.1 may have an impact particularly relevant to ESS1,3,6 and
                      8 . Potential impacts including loss of biodiversity and habitats, introduction of alien invasive species, water pollution
                      and reduced environmental flows, impacts on livelihoods, and potential exclusion of vulnerable groups, amongst
                      others. To mitigate risks, environmental and social screening and monitoring tools consistent with the ESF will be
                      incorporated in the financial mechanisms and decision making. The Terms of Reference (TORs) for the consulting
                      services preparing the activities under component 2 and 3 will take into account relevant ESSs.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      A stakeholder analysis will be conducted as part of the SEP preparation. Activities to strengthen coordination
                      between OKACOM, Member States, donors, and implementing partners will be crucial in creating entry points for
                      more localized engagement. At the local level, vulnerable groups may include women, female-headed households,
                      Indigenous Peoples, and those with limited access to information or decision-making processes. The SEP will outline
                      the engagement strategy for different stakeholders throughout various project phases. OKAKOM will carry out
                      stakeholder engagement activities during project preparation and implementation, and will include a record of them




                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                      in the SEP. This includes the CORB Fund Secretariat, which will be responsible for day-to-day project management,
                      including environmental and social standards compliance.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The project will engage different categories of workers. Direct Workers will be employed by the CORB Fund
                      Secretariat and OKACOM to manage the project. Contracted Workers will be engaged for specific technical tasks, such
                      as conducting economic assessments, various studies, developing investment-ready project packages, and providing
                      training to Fund Secretariat staff. Project will not finance provision of works. The project will need to comply with the
                      national labor laws of Angola, Botswana, and Namibia, as well as ESS2. Requirements of Labor Management Plan will
                      be reflected as part of ESCP, to ensure Recipient's direct responsibility over labor issues in the context of the project.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant. While the activities directly supported will not have an impact, the potential downstream activities
                      under sub-component 2.1 and sub-component 3.1 may have an impact on water quality and lead to transboundary
                      impact if not properly managed. To mitigate risks the activities will be screened using a E&S screening and monitoring
                      tools to be prepared as part of the activities under sub-component 1.1. ToRs for the activities to be prepared under
                      component 2 and 3 will make provision for the screening and mitigation of impacts related to ESS3.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant. While the activities directly supported will not have an impact, the potential downstream activities



Public Disclosure
                      under sub-component 2.1 and sub-component 3.1 may have an impact on ecosystem services which may result in
                      community health and safety risks if not managed, including SEA/SH risks. However, activities under component 2.1
                      and component 3 are aimed at enhancing livelihoods and reducing adverse impacts, and will considers climate
                      resilience as part of the downstream activity selection. ToRs for the activities to be prepared under component 2 and
                      3 will make provision for the screening and mitigation of impacts related to ESS4.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant as the project will finance the preparation of project concepts for potential investment in
                      transboundary projects via the CORB Fund, including pre-feasibility studies for priority investment projects. These
                      investments may include infrastructure and natural resource development, which could potentially require land
                      acquisition or restrictions on land use, leading to physical and/or economic displacement. ToRs for studies will need
                      to prepared in line with ESS5, taking into account downstream risks related to land access. The ESCP will include
                      provisions related to the need for instruments to manage risks under ESS5, as needed.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant since the downstream activities, not directly supported by the project, will be implemented in a
                      internationally important biodiversity and Ramsar site. While the downstream activities have not yet been clearly
                      defined, it may support activities with particular relevance to ESS6 namely sustainable fisheries, forest management
                      and sustainable logging and charcoal alternatives among others. Impacts may include loss of biodiversity and


                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                      habitats, introduction of alien invasive species and availability of living natural resources for communities and will be
                      assessed once additional information becomes available. Activities under component 3 however aims to enhance
                      livelihoods and promote biodiversity conservation by mitigating existing impact. E&S screening and monitoring tools
                      to be prepared as part financing decision making. ToRs for the activities to be prepared under component 2 and 3 will
                      make provision for the screening and mitigation of impacts related to ESS6.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                   TBD
                      Local Communities

                      The project will focus on the region known to be inhabited by communities that rely on the natural resources and
                      ecosystem services of the Cubango-Okavango River Basin for their livelihoods and well-being. These communities
                      may exhibit characteristics of Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local
                      Communities (IP/SSAHUTLC) as defined by ESS7. Therefore, a targeted social assessment (as part of preparation of
                      the Stakeholder Engagement Plan) will need to be undertaken during project preparation to confirm their presence,
                      characteristics, the nature of potential project impacts, and the specific approach to be adopted to ensure their
                      inclusion as project stakeholders in a culturally-appropriate way. The ESCP will include relevant commitments for
                      them, as applicable.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      ESS8 is considered relevant at this stage and will need to be further assessed during project preparation. The
                      Okavango Delta is inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage list as a natural site based on it meeting 3 criterions




Public Disclosure
                      namely exceptional natural beauty, outstanding ecological processes and outstanding biodiversity. The cultural
                      heritage relevance and value of the delta will need to be further assessed as part of the appraisal stage.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not currently considered relevant.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                              No
                       The use of borrower frameworks will not be considered for this project.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                       To be determined during appraisal.




                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     1) Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Prior to Appraisal), including an assessment of the potential presence of
                     IP/SSAHUTLCs and other vulnerable groups in the project’s area (as part of the stakeholder mapping process), a
                     culturally appropriate grievance mechanism, and a record of stakeholder engagement activities carried out until then
                     2) Draft Environmental and Social Commitments Plan (Prior to Appraisal).
                     3) Draft Environmental and Social Assessment which meets the requirements of paragraph 52 of ESS1

                     During implementation, all TORs of TA activities to be supported by the Project will be screened to ensure consistency
                     with the applicable provisions of the ESF. Additional instruments to be defined in the ESCP.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Lars Anders Jagerskog                 Title:         Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                   Specialist

                      Email:                  ajagerskog@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                      TTL Contact:            Diego Juan Rodriguez                  Job Title:     Lead Economist

                      Email:                  drodriguez1@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                              Lars Anders Jagerskog, Diego Juan Rodriguez

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                     Juanita Whitfield

                     ADM Social Specialist:                            Aimonchok Tashieva




                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                    Page 8 of 8
