Public Disclosure Authorized

                                                                                                                    Report No: PADHI01399




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                           INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION


                                                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                ON A

                                                                         PROPOSED CREDIT


                                                                         IN THE AMOUNT OF




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                          US$500 MILLION


                                                                               TO THE

                                                                         REPUBLIC OF GHANA


                                                                                FOR A




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       GHANA MARKET ACCESS AND CONNECTIVITY PROJECT
                                                                        (P513708)

                                                                            MAY 6, 2026



                               Transport and Logistics Global Practice
                               Western and Central Africa Region

                               This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply a presumed
                               outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated document will be made
                               publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s policy on Access to Information
                      CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS


               (Exchange Rate Effective Mar 31, 2026}

                                    GHS
                 Currency Unit =
                                    USD
                          US$1 = 10.9847 GHS
                             FISCAL YEAR
                       January 1 - December 31




Regional Vice President: Ousmane Diagana
     Regional Director: Franz R. Drees-Gross
      Country Director: Robert R. Taliercio
     Practice Manager: Anne-Cecile Souhaid
                         Ndeye Diop Diaw Gueye, Akua Pokuaa Timpabi, Ashwini Rekha
  Task Team Leader(s):
                         Sebastian
                        ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AETA      Agriculture for Economic Transformation Agenda
AIT       Agency Implementation Team
AM        Accountability Mechanism
AWPB      Annual Work Plan and Budget
BoG       Bank of Ghana
CCDR      Country Climate and Development Report
CERC      Contingent Emergency Response Component
COCOBOD   Ghana Cocoa Board
CPF       Country Partnership Framework
CPI       Consumer Price Index
CRI       Corporate Results Indicator
DA        Designated Account
DFI       Department of Factories Inspectorate
DFIL      Disbursement and Financial Information Letter
DFR       Department of Feeder Roads
DPF       Development Policy Financing
DUR       Department of Urban Roads
EAP       Emergency Action Plan
EIRR      Economic Internal Rate of Return
EPA       Environmental Protection Agency
ERP       Enterprise Resource Planning
E&S       Environmental and Social
ESF       Environmental and Social Framework
ESCP      Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESMF      Environmental and Social Management Framework
FM        Financial Management
GBV       Gender-Based Violence
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
GHA       Ghana Highway Authority
GHG       Greenhouse Gas
GMACP     Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project
GoG       Government of Ghana
GRM       Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS       Grievance Redress Service
IFC       International Finance Corporation
IFR       Interim Financial Report
IMF       International Monetary Fund
IPF       Investment Project Financing
Km        Kilometer
KTC       Koforidua Training Centre
LVD       Lands Valuation Division
M&E       Monitoring and Evaluation
MCC       Millennium Challenge Corporation
MFD       Maximizing Finance for Development
MRH       Ministry of Roads and Highways
MoFA      Ministry of Food and Agriculture
MoF       Ministry of Finance
OHS       Occupational Health and Safety
PBC       Performance-Based Contract
PC        Project Coordinator
PDO       Project Development Objective
PFM       Public Financial Management
PIM       Project Implementation Manual
PPSD      Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PS        Procurement Specialist
RAP       Resettlement Action Plan
RED       Roads Economic Decision
RMTF      Road Maintenance Trust Fund
RSSAT     Road Safety Screening and Appraisal Tool
SEA/SH    Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/ Sexual Harassment
SMEs      Small and Medium Enterprises
SOE       State-Owned Enterprise
SPC       Shadow Price of Carbon
ToR       Terms of Reference
TSIP      Transport Sector Improvement Project
VOC       Vehicle Operating Cost
WIGRAMS   Web-based Integrated Geographic Information System Road Asset Management System
The World Bank
Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                                                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



                                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS
 DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i
 I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 1
       A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................1
       B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................................2
 II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 4
       A. Project Development Objective(s) ...................................................................................................4
       B. Theory of Change and Project Development Objective(s) (PDO) Indicators ...................................4
       C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................6
       D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................7
       E. Role of Partners ..............................................................................................................................10
       F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design....................................................................10
 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 11
       A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................11
       B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ..................................................12
       C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................12
 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 13
       A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ..................................................................................13
       B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................18
       C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ...................................................................21
 V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 22
 ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 25
 ANNEX 2: ANALYTICAL APPROACH FOR ROAD PRIORITIZATION .......................................... 31
 ANNEX 3: ROAD MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE AND FINANCING .............................................. 34
 ANNEX 4: PROJECT INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT ........................................................... 36
 ANNEX 5: CLIMATE RESILIENCE OF THE ROAD INVESTMENTS .............................................. 37
 ANNEX 6: LIST OF DISTRICTS BY CLUSTER ............................................................................ 39
 ANNEX 7: REFERENCES........................................................................................................ 40
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Ghana                    Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project
                                                    Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                    Classification
                         Investment Project
P513708                                             Substantial
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities

[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                     [✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                   [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                        [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                              [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                    [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                          [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                 [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                Expected Closing Date
28-May-2026                           30-Jun-2031
Bank/IFC Collaboration                Joint Level
Yes                                   Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination


Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve and sustain all-season farm-to-market road connectivity in selected districts of Ghana.


Components



                                                                                                                     i
 Component Name                                                        Cost (US$)
 Rehabilitation of feeder roads                                    473,000,000.00
 Road maintenance and support to the Road Maintenance Trust Fund
                                                                    41,000,000.00
 reforms
 Project management and implementation support                       9,000,000.00
 Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)                              0.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower/Recipient:              Republic of Ghana

 Implementing Agency:             Ministry of Roads and Highways



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                    523.00

  Total Financing                                                         523.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                            500.00

  Financing Gap                                                             0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                            500.00

      IDA Credit                                                          500.00

 Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Counterpart Funding                                                     23.00




                                                                                   ii
        Borrower/Recipient                                                                                   23.00


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

                                                                                         Guarantee
                             Credit Amount      Grant Amount        SML Amount                         Total Amount
                                                                                           Amount

National
Performance-Based                   500.00              0.00                 0.00               0.00         500.00
Allocations (PBA)

Total                               500.00              0.00                 0.00               0.00         500.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year                   2026             2027             2028               2029             2030          2031

Annual                  0.00            27.00           223.10             200.50            20.40        29.00
Cumulative              0.00            27.00           250.10             450.60            471.00       500.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                           Contributing Practice Areas
Transport and Logistics                                        Agriculture and Food

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                                Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                  ⚫ Moderate
2. Macroeconomic                                                             ⚫ Substantial



                                                                                                                   iii
 3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Moderate
 4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Substantial
 5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Substantial
 6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Substantial
 7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Substantial
 8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Moderate
 9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Substantial


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
 POLICY COMPLIANCE


 Policy
 Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
 [ ] Yes      [✓] No

 Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
 [ ] Yes [✓] No



 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


 Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
                                     E & S Standards                                              Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                     Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                            Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                  Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                   Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                   Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement       Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                     Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                     Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                             Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                      Not Currently Relevant



                                                                                                              iv
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Schedule 2 - Section I - A. Institutional arrangements 1. Project Steering Committee Not later than two (2) months after
the Effective Date, the Recipient shall establish and thereafter maintain at all times during the implementation of the
Project a steering committee with composition and mandate acceptable to the Association (“Project Steering
Committee”), as further described in the Project Implementation Manual. The Project Steering Committee shall be
responsible, inter alia, for: (a) providing strategic and policy guidance on the implementation of the Project; (b)
reviewing progress made towards achieving the Project’s objectives and approving the Annual Work Plans and Budgets;
(c) approving the Project Implementation Manual and updates; and (d) approving technical reports; all in accordance
with the Project Implementation Manual.
Schedule 2 - Section IV - E. Not later than thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, the Recipient has: (a) established and
operationalized a Project grievance redress mechanism; and (b) completed environmental and social training as
required in the ESCP, in form and substance satisfactory to the Association.
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) A - Organizational structure b) Engage a non profit firm to support
GRM, SE/SEA/SH operations under the oversight of MRH/DFR not later than three months after Project Effective Date
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) C - Regular Reporting Submit quarterly reports to the Association
throughout Project implementation, commencing 90 days after the Effective Date. Submit each report to the
Association no later than 30 days after the end of each reporting period.
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) D - Contractor's Monthly Reports Submit the monthly reports to the
Association upon request or as annexes to the reports to be submitted under action C above throughout the Project’s
implementation period starting from 90 days of the Effective Date.
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) - ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions 2.1 Labor Management
Procedures Prepare and implement the Labor Management Procedures (LMP) for the Project Prior to Effective Date
and thereafter implement the LMP throughout Project implementation
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) - ESS 4: Community Health and Safety 4.3 SEA and SH Risks Prepare
and implement a SEA/SH Response Plan, to assess and manage the risks of SEA and SH associated with Project
implementation, labor influx, and worker-community interactions, and ensure that appropriate prevention, reporting,
and response mechanisms are in place throughout Project implementation. Prior to Effective Date and thereafter
implement the SEA-SH Response Plan throughout Project implementation

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                            Citation                        Description                     Financing Source
                                                                (b) under Category (2) until
                                                                and unless the Recipient
                                B. Withdrawal Conditions;
Disbursement                                                    has transferred into the        IBRD/IDA
                                Withdrawal Period
                                                                DFR Maintenance
                                                                Operational Account an


                                                                                                                           v
                                             amount equivalent to
                                             thirteen million Dollars
                                             ($13,000,000) as
                                             Counterpart Funding;
                                             (c) under Category (3) until
                                             and unless the Recipient
                                             has transferred into the
                                             DFR Maintenance
                B. Withdrawal Conditions;
Disbursement                                 Operational Account an         IBRD/IDA
                Withdrawal Period
                                             amount equivalent to ten
                                             million Dollars
                                             ($10,000,000) as
                                             Counterpart Funding;
                                             (d) under Category (4) until
                                             and unless the Recipient
                                             has prepared, adopted and
                                             disclosed the relevant: (A)
                                             Environmental and Social
                                             Impact Assessment; (B)
                                             Environmental and Social
                B. Withdrawal Conditions;
Disbursement                                 Management Plan                IBRD/IDA
                Withdrawal Period
                                             (including, a gender-based
                                             violence (GBV) Action
                                             Plan); (C) Resettlement
                                             Action Plans (RAPs); all in
                                             form and substance
                                             satisfactory to the
                                             Association;
                                             the Recipient has
                                             developed and adopted the
                                             Project Implementation
                                             Manual, the Labor
                                             Management Procedures,
                ARTICLE V - Effectiveness;
Effectiveness                                and the Sexual Exploitation    IBRD/IDA
                Termination
                                             and Abuse and Sexual
                                             Harassment Response Plan
                                             (SEA-SH), in form and
                                             substance satisfactory to
                                             the Association.




                                                                                       vi
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT




I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
A. Project Strategic Context

1.      Following the 2022 macroeconomic crisis, Ghana’s economic recovery has gained significant momentum. Gross
domestic product (GDP) growth accelerated to 5.7 percent in 2024, and further to 6 percent in 20251—the fastest pace
since 2019—driven by a broadening of economic activity beyond the extractive sectors. Macroeconomic stabilization has
advanced on multiple fronts: inflation fell sharply from 23.8 percent to 3.2 percent year-on-year by March 2026, supported
by tighter monetary policy and currency appreciation; fiscal and external balances have improved; and progress on debt
restructuring has strengthened investor confidence. These gains were achieved under a Government-led recovery
program, supported beginning in 2023 by a US$3 billion IMF program and a US$900 million World Bank Development
Policy Finance series. However, headline growth has not yet translated to commensurate welfare gains. At the lower-
middle-income poverty line of US$4.20 per person per day in 2021 Purchasing Power Parity (PPP), poverty is estimated at
56.5 percent in 2025 slightly down from 56.7 percent in 2024, while the absolute number of poor is estimated to have
increased slightly. Ghana now benefits from a window of opportunity to translate macroeconomic momentum into broad-
based welfare gains. This will require moving beyond stabilization to deeper structural reform and making significant
investments in key productive sectors for economic transformation and job creation.
2.       Transforming Agriculture remains one of the country's greatest vectors for inclusive growth and jobs. While the
sector employs about 38 percent of the labor force it only contributed 22.8 percent to GDP in 20252. Yields for major
staple crops remain below 50 percent of their potential, driven by constraints in input access, technology adoption, and
agronomic practices. Further along the chain, only about 6 percent of workers in Ghana’s agrifood system are employed
in value-adding activities, where the highest margins are generated. Cutting across these constraints is a fundamental
market access problem rooted in poor rural road connectivity. In key agricultural production areas, inadequate feeder and
trunk road networks prevent farmers from reaching buyers and processors reliably, drive up transport costs, and cause
significant post-harvest losses — including deterioration in product quality — that erode farm incomes and discourage
investment in productivity improvements. As a result, even where agricultural potential exists, it remains locked in. These
connectivity constraints push labor toward low-productivity informal services and hamper the achievement of potential
poverty reduction brought by agricultural transformation. Improving rural road connectivity is therefore a prerequisite
rather than a complement to Ghana’s agricultural development.
3.       In 2025, the Government of Ghana (GoG) introduced the Agriculture for Economic Transformation Agenda
(AETA), a framework which prioritizes logistics, value-chain development and productivity growth as pathways to food
security, reduced food inflation, and sustainable job creation. Under the AETA, the Feed Ghana Program (2025–2028) —
the Ministry of Food and Agriculture’s flagship instrument — is being implemented to accelerate agricultural
modernization. To address the infrastructure deficit that has long constrained this agenda, the GoG also launched the “Big
Push” initiative, a major infrastructure drive designed to bridge the connectivity gap that prevents agricultural production
areas from integrating effectively into national and regional markets.3 Central to this effort, the government has
committed to upgrading and rehabilitating approximately 5,000 kilometers of feeder roads — a scale of investment that
signals a strategic shift toward treating rural connectivity as a foundational enabler of agricultural transformation.



1
  https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2025/08/14/ghana-economy-shows-resilience-amid-a-challenging-
environment
2
  MoFA (2025).
3
  Ibidem
                                                                                                                     Page 1
         The World Bank
         Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


4.      Ghana’s priority agricultural value chains — maize, rice, yam, and cassava — represent some of the country's
most significant opportunities for food security, rural employment, and economic growth, underpinned by strong
comparative advantage and robust domestic demand. The scale of that demand signals the size of the opportunity:
Ghana spends roughly US$500 million annually importing rice, and imports 10,000 to 60,000 metric tons of yellow maize
each year to meet demand from the poultry sector — part of a food import bill estimated at about US$3 billion per year,
an opportunity for domestic producers. However, these value chains are characterized by low-productivity, subsistence-
oriented production systems — with significant room for the development of processing and higher value addition.
5.      Improving rural road connectivity by upgrading, rehabilitating, and reliably maintaining rural roads stands out
as one of the most critical and cross-cutting enablers of agricultural transformation. Better market access allows farmers
to reach buyers and processors reliably, lowers transport costs, and reduces post-harvest losses — strengthening the
returns to productivity investment across all value chains, enabling farmers to participate more effectively in value
addition and regional markets.
6.        Improving access to all-weather roads will also help reduce gender disparities in rural areas. Women represent
52% of the agricultural labor force and carry out the bulk of post-harvest activities such as storage, processing, and
marketing.4 Evidence suggests that women face disproportionate constraints in accessing reliable transport services,
storage facilities, and market infrastructure, which restricts their participation in higher-value markets and increases post-
harvest losses and transaction costs—particularly in northern rural regions.5 In the transport sector, women represent
only about three percent of construction and maintenance workers, reflecting skills gaps, restrictive hiring practices, safety
concerns, and prevailing social norms.6 Improving rural road connectivity can therefore help reduce gender disparities by
facilitating women’s access to markets, services, and employment opportunities in agricultural value chains.
    B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
7.      Road transport dominates mobility in Ghana, carrying over 90 percent of passenger and freight traffic.7 The
country’s road network totals about 94,200 km, of which only 27 percent is paved8 and more than half is in fair to
impassable condition.9 Feeder roads—accounting for over 50 percent of the network—are in the poorest condition, with
more than 60 percent classified as fair or poor. These roads connect agricultural, mining, tourism, and other productive
areas to the trunk and urban network, making them critical for economic activity and market access. Although Ghana’s
road density is above the regional average,10 significant spatial disparities persist. Northern regions remain underserved,
while the southern half of the country has higher road density but often poor service levels, resulting in longer travel times
and higher transport costs for accessing markets and economic opportunities.
8.      Consistent underfunding and insufficient maintenance have undermined Ghana’s road network and
connectivity, while natural hazard events further accelerate asset deterioration. Road maintenance allocations remain
inadequate. Between 2018 and 2021, average maintenance coverage reached only 45 percent, compared with a planned
target of 65 percent.11 Ultimately, systematic underspending in road rehabilitation and maintenance has wider economic
implications, including higher infrastructure-related transport costs, weaker farm-to-market connectivity, lower
agricultural investment, production losses due to poor road conditions, and higher food prices over time, in Ghana. This
gap is particularly concerning given that flooding and landslides are the most frequent and damaging hazards affecting


4
    AAFORD PCU (2024) Gender Strategy, Ghana.
5 MEDA. 2022. Why MEDA Works With Rural Women; Ograh et al. 2025.
6 https://www.alignplatform.org/resources/women-work-engaging-young-women-construction-ghana
7 National Transport Policy. MOT (2020).
8 Sector Medium-term Development Plan (SMTDP): 2022–2025. MRH 2022.
9 Medium-term Expenditure Framework 2024–2027.
10 World Bank InfraSAP database 2021.
11 MRH 2022.


                                                                                                                       Page 2
        The World Bank
        Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Ghana’s roads, with around 117 km affected by flooding each year. Between 2020 and 2050, floods are projected to cause
about US$2.05 billion in discounted direct damages to road assets, according to the Ghana Country Climate and
Development Report (CCDR), 2022)12, making consistent maintenance practices and adequate funding key to the
sustainability of Ghana’s road investments.
9.      The new Road Maintenance Trust Fund Act, 2025 (Act 1147)13 which annulled the Road Fund Act, 1997 (Act 536)
presents a major reform aimed at addressing consistent financing gaps in road maintenance. The Fund is the primary
source of financing for rehabilitation and maintenance, covering about 70 percent of maintenance needs. Current
revenues are from fuel levies, tolls, vehicle registration fees, and international transit charges, which are all fixed (specific)
rather than ad valorem which is the best practice. The absence of automatic inflation adjustments to these revenue
streams has led to stagnating maintenance revenues, which also suffers from periodic reallocations to non-maintenance
uses. The RMTF is designed to strengthen efficiency, equity, and accountability by ensuring that revenues are dedicated
exclusively to road maintenance. Additionally, the reforms are expected to consolidate existing revenue sources and
allocate resources through incentive-based contracts and a formula that considers efficiency and spatial equity. Despite
these reforms, the 2025 allocation of Ghanaian Cedi (GHC) 2.81 billion (about US$234 million) remains well below the
estimated annual maintenance needs of approximately US$700 million14 making maintenance funding still a key challenge
of the sector.
10.      In addition to inadequate financing, operationalization of the GoG’s developed road asset management tools
for maintenance prioritization, planning, and budgeting has stalled. Through the Transport Sector Improvement Project
(TSIP, P151026) which closed in June 2025 the road sector-initiated reforms to improve asset management performance,
including the establishment of a dedicated unit and the development of a Web-based Integrated GIS Road Asset
Management System (WIGRAMS). The system was designed to collect and analyze geo-referenced road asset data to
support prioritization of interventions, planning and budgeting, and asset valuation. WIGRAMS was intended to replace
the existing Excel-based system and harmonize asset data across the three agencies under the Ministry of Roads and
Highways (MRH). The tool requires road asset inventory data for the feeder and urban roads and an update of about
15,000km trunk road asset data for its operationalization. Once operational, the system could become a key tool for
strengthening maintenance planning and aligning sector practices with the objectives of contributing to the objective of
the RMTF Act 1147, 2025, and the National Transport Policy (2020) regarding proper planning and budgeting.
11.     Ghana’s road sector involves multiple institutions with distinct but interlinked mandates. The MRH leads and
coordinates the sector through three implementing agencies: the Department of Feeder Roads (DFR), the Department of
Urban Roads (DUR), and the Ghana Highway Authority (GHA), responsible for feeder, urban, and trunk roads, respectively.
Historically, the Ghana Cocoa Board (COCOBOD) financed road construction in cocoa-growing areas, with MRH agencies
as implementing entities. More recently, COCOBOD has refocused its core mandate of regulating and managing the cocoa
sector. The responsibility for financing cocoa roads has therefore shifted to MRH. Metropolitan, municipal, and district
assemblies also play a role in road management under Ghana’s decentralization framework. The MRH and its agencies
have over the years implemented WB-financed projects and planned, supervised and monitored all national road
development and maintenance projects – building their capacity in the process overtime.

  C. Relationship to Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
12.      The proposed project is aligned with the World Bank’s CPF No. 157249-GH for FY2022–2026 which is ending this
fiscal year and the institution’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity on a livable
planet. The project supports Objective 1.4: Improved connectivity for access to productive opportunities, by improving

12 Ghana Country Climate and Development Report (2022).
13 Road Maintenance Trust fund Act, 2025 (Act 1147): https://imccod.gov.gh/wp-content/uploads/2026/01/ROAD-MAINTENANCE-TRUST-FUND-

ACT-2025-ACT-1147.pdf
14 Ibid.


                                                                                                                              Page 3
        The World Bank
        Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


and maintaining feeder roads to strengthen connectivity in areas with high potential for agricultural job creation and to
enhance access to markets and services. Improved feeder roads are expected to reduce post-harvest losses and transport
costs, enabling farmers to scale up production beyond subsistence levels and expand employment opportunities. The
project also contributes to Objective 3.3: Improved household and community resilience to shocks, through the design
and rehabilitation of road infrastructure that is resilient to climate hazards. In addition, the Project is aligned with the new
CPF for FY2027-2032 under preparation. Discussions on the new CPF place agriculture transformation and road
connectivity at the center of the government’s ambition for future job creation and growth. The project is expected to be
a cornerstone of this strategy.
13.     The project is aligned with the World Bank’s flagship Mission AgriConnect initiative.15 At a global scale, it aims
to transform agri-food systems, benefit smallholder farming, create jobs, and strengthen global food security by lifting
300 million farmers up the value chain by 2030. The operation supports the implementation of the Ghana AgriConnect
Compact16 by providing farm-to-market access for priority agricultural value chains through the provision of rural feeder
roads.

 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A. Project Development Objective(s)
14.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve and sustain all-season farm-to-market road connectivity
in selected districts of Ghana.
B. Theory of Change and Project Development Objective(s) (PDO) Indicators
15.     The project aims to improve all-season farm-to-market connectivity by rehabilitating feeder roads and
strengthening road maintenance, thereby reducing transport costs and enhancing market access over time. It comprises
four components: (i) rehabilitation of feeder roads; (ii) road maintenance and support to the Road Maintenance Trust
Fund(RMTF); (iii) project management and implementation support; and (iv) Contingent Emergency Response Component
(CERC). Key activities under the components will include rehabilitation and maintenance of approximately 1,050 km of
feeder roads and scale-up of the WIGRAMS tool. Immediate outputs include improved all-season road access, expanded
use of WIGRAMS, and strengthened institutional and financial capacity for the RMTF. Over time, improved connectivity is
expected to support higher incomes and economic opportunities for farmers as well as small and medium enterprises
(SMEs).
16.      Theory of Change. The project design follows the results chain in Figure 1.
17.      Problem statement. Insufficient investment in rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads increases
infrastructure-related transport costs, weakens farm-to-market connectivity, and, over time, contributes to higher food
prices in Ghana.




15 See AgriConnect website
16 The Ghana AgriConnect Compact is under discussion and has not yet been approved by the Government. However, it is anticipated that this

operation will support its objectives by enhancing connectivity from farm-gates to markets.

                                                                                                                                   Page 4
        The World Bank
        Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                                           Figure 1. Theory of Change




18.       Key results. The following PDO indicators will be considered:
PDO-Level Indicators
          •     People benefiting from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure services (number of people,
                gender and youth -disaggregated) - Corporate Results Indicator (CRI)
          •     Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (number of farmers, gender disaggregated)
          •     Share of feeder roads maintained under the project (percentage)
Multicriteria Framework Project Design Approach
19.      The project design adopts a multicriteria framework to strengthen stakeholder participation in decision-making
and ensure flexibility for potential scale-up. The approach supports the selection of priority road rehabilitation
investments within the GoG’s 5,000 km program, based on key factors including road condition, crop production with
focus on staples like yam, maize, rice and cassava, markets, and district-level food insecurity (see annex 2). Districts
identified through the analysis were grouped into four clusters (see Figure 2) to facilitate efficient implementation. This
transparent process, conducted jointly with the GoG, enables streamlined procurement, faster implementation, and
improved contract management.17




17 This approach is consistent with the GoG’s national development and transport strategies, which prioritize rural and feeder road connectivity to

link agricultural production areas to markets, improve access to social services, and support inclusive growth.

                                                                                                                                             Page 5
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                Figure 2. Map of the Four Priority Clusters – Source: WB Team




20.      During implementation, the same framework will be used to prioritize and select the feeder roads to be
rehabilitated within each cluster. This will be done by mapping key production areas and markets to the road network to
identify the most critical links for maintaining farm-to-market connectivity and supporting food security. Priority will be
given to roads where climate disruptions would significantly constrain access between farms and markets. Figure 3
outlines the three-step analytical approach being used to identify road investments, which aligns with Ghana’s strategic
priorities and the Government’s objective of reducing food inflation through improved market access.
                                  Figure 3. The Three Steps of the Prioritization Framework




 C. Project Beneficiaries
21.    The project is expected to reach approximately 557,000 beneficiaries, including 278,000 women, 312,000 youth,
and 368,000 farmers. As road selection has not yet been finalized, this estimate is based on the population residing within

                                                                                                                    Page 6
        The World Bank
        Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


a 2 km radius of the feeder road network, prorated according to the share of the network to be rehabilitated. The actual
number of beneficiaries—including road users such as farmers, women, children, non-motorized transport (NMT) users,
persons with disabilities, and the elderly—will be determined once specific roads are selected during implementation.
Additional beneficiaries include local assemblies and SMEs, particularly agribusinesses located in markets and along
improved corridors, which are expected to benefit from better access to agriculture-produce and transport services.
Transport operators will also benefit from improved road conditions through reduced vehicle operating costs (VOCs).
Institutional capacity will be strengthened through on-the-job and off-site training.
D. Project Components
22.     The project is estimated to cost US$523 million, of which US$500 million is financed through the International
Development Association (IDA) credit and US$23 million through counterpart funding from the Government of Ghana
for maintenance. The project is designed around four components, as described below.
Component 1: Rehabilitation of Feeder Roads (US$ 473 million IDA)
Subcomponent 1.1: Improvement of all-weather road access from farm-gates to markets (US$ 453million)
23.     The component will finance the rehabilitation of approximately 1,050 km of feeder roads to improve all-
weather access from farm-gates to markets across the four priority clusters. Roads within each cluster will be
disaggregated into an optimal number of procurement lots for a cost-based or admeasurement works contracts, each
with a maximum 12-month defect liability. The total road design surface is estimated to comprise of 70 percent bitumen
and 30 percent gravel using the Systematic Paving Decision (SPADE-PLUS) framework.18 The final location, length, and
surfacing type of roads will be confirmed during implementation.
24.     Road designs will incorporate climate-resilient features—such as bridges, drains, culverts, and scour
protection—to reduce vulnerability to floods, heavy rainfall, drought, and temperature extremes, and ensure year-
round accessibility.
25.     All rehabilitated roads will integrate road safety measures, including speed management and design features
to protect vulnerable road users, who account for more than 70 percent of road fatalities in rural areas. Based on
detailed designs, the project will finance low-cost, high-impact interventions such as pedestrian crossings, rumble strips,
and improved signage in settlements along project roads. Roadworks will also incorporate universal accessibility standards
and safe pedestrian walkways in urban and semi-urban areas to promote inclusivity.
26.      The project will support the recruitment and retention of women in road construction and maintenance
through civil works contracts. Bidding documents will include provisions such as minimum targets for women’s
employment in medium- and high-skilled jobs, equal pay policies, and anti-harassment and grievance mechanisms to
enhance women’s participation and address gender gaps. To support women’s recruitment and retention in civil works
contracts, this component will finance certification training delivered by the MRH through the Koforidua Training Center
(KTC) or Technical and Vocational Education and Training Center (TVET), complemented by mentorship programs to
facilitate women’s access to medium- and high-skilled, long-term private sector employment.
27.      Road rehabilitation will explore opportunities to integrate last-mile fiber optic infrastructure and improve
access to warehouses and logistics facilities. As part of the detailed design, assessments will identify feasible locations
for installing fiber-optic cables to enhance digital connectivity for priority public facilities, including health centers, schools,
administrative offices, and police stations. In collaboration with International Finance Corporation (IFC), the road selection
process will also prioritize access to warehouses and logistics facilities within targeted agricultural clusters. Improved

18 SPADE‑PLUS is a World Bank multi‑criteria framework for deciding whether to pave rural, low‑volume roads, incorporating social, environmental,

and climate benefits beyond traditional economic analysis. It uses a two‑stage process: prioritization through weighted criteria (SPADE) followed by
economic or cost‑effectiveness analysis based on traffic levels.

                                                                                                                                            Page 7
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


connectivity between production areas, markets, and storage facilities is expected to strengthen value chains and support
greater capital mobilization for SMEs.
Subcomponent 1.2: Supervision of roads rehabilitation and maintenances works (US$18 million)
28.     This subcomponent will finance the hiring of supervision firms who will be responsible for monitoring and
supervising the civil works and maintenance contracts throughout the project duration. The supervision firms will be
decentralized and resident in the project areas of intervention.
Subcomponent 1.3: Implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan (US$ 2 million)
29.  This subcomponent will fund the implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan which is a prerequisite to
commence the civil works at sections where people affected by the project were identified.
Component 2: Road Maintenance and Support to the Road Maintenance Trust Fund Reform (US$41 million of which
US$18 million from IDA and US$23 million from GoG)
Subcomponent 2.1: Maintenance of Feeder Roads rehabilitated under the project (US$13 million IDA and US$23 million
GoG)
30.     This subcomponent adopts a cofinancing approach with counterparts fundings to ensure road maintenance
over the life of the project through performance-based contracts (PBCs), thereby enhancing sustainability. Maintenance
contracts for each of the clusters will be signed before and commence after the expiration of the defect liability period of
the respective rehabilitation works contract and will run for the remainder of the project life. The supervision consultant
provision in Component 1 will also be responsible for the supervision of all civil works, including the maintenance
contracts, during the project tenure. Rehabilitation of clusters 3 and 4 funded by IDA will be tied to the transfer of
counterpart fundings of US$23 million in the project designated account in two tranches. These counterpart funds will be
deposited in a project-designated operational account, in line with financial management (FM) assessment, to safeguard
contractors’ payments (see Annex 3 for estimated annual requirements) to ensure continued availability of the of GoG
funds and predictable payments to contractors.
31.    Collectively, the activities will ensure the availability of funds, strengthen the sustainability of feeder road
investments, and support a performance-based road maintenance system.
Subcomponent 2.2: – Support to the Road Maintenance Trust Fund reforms (US$5 million IDA)
32.      Sub-component 2.2(a) – Support to the Road Maintenance Trust Fund reforms (US$2 million IDA): This
subcomponent aims to enhance the RMTF which has a pivotal role in the country maintenance strategy and
implementation. It will finance technical assistance (TA) to support the ongoing RMTF, update of the National Tolling
Policy, and strengthen the use of WIGRAMS. The TA will focus on improving resource mobilization and revenue
management, financial analysis and maintenance revenue distribution modeling to ensure equity, relevant support on
axle load regulations and the development of an enterprise resource planning (ERP) digital platform. The ERP platform
will provide the RMTF with real-time visibility over financial commitments, contractor workloads, and maintenance
program performance, while automating payment workflows and enabling a fully auditable system. It will interface with
WIGRAMS and the Road Contract Management System, which supports contract monitoring, certification, and payment
processing at the MRH. Together, these interventions are expected to help ensure predictable fund flows, improve the
efficiency of resource allocation, and strengthen monitoring of maintenance implementation and financing.
33.     Sub-component 2.2(b) – Road Asset Management (RAMS) (US$3 million IDA): The subcomponent will also
finance road asset data collection equipment, annual road asset inventories, and traffic data collection for trunk, urban,
and feeder roads throughout the project. It will further support TA to enhance the use of WIGRAMS for annual
maintenance planning and budgeting. This will enable WIGRAMS to function as a core decision-support tool for evidence-

                                                                                                                     Page 8
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


based prioritization, performance-oriented maintenance financing, and improved accountability under the RMTF.
Currently, WIGRAMS covers approximately 15,000 km of trunk roads, with significant gaps in road condition data,
underscoring the need for expanded and systematic data collection.
Component 3: Project Management and Implementation support (US$9 million IDA)
Subcomponent 3.1: Project Management and Implementation Support (US$8 million IDA)
34.      The subcomponent will finance operational costs of the implementing agencies, fiduciary audits, monitoring and
evaluation (M&E), engagement of the non-governmental organization for the management of the Grievance Redress
Mechanism (GRM) and citizen engagement support, and training for implementing agencies and contractors to strengthen
their capacity to manage and implement maintenance works. It will also support the engagement of a social development
specialist to provide TA.
Subcomponent 3.2: Strengthening Ghana’s national Environmental, Social, Health and Safety institutional capacity for
improved regulatory compliance and development outcomes (US$1 million IDA)
35.      This subcomponent will finance activities to strengthen institutional capacity to monitor and ensure compliance
with occupational health and safety (OHS) measures during civil works. It will support the Ghana Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), the Department of Factories Inspectorate (DFI), and the Lands Valuation Division (LVD) to operationalize
the new Environmental Assessment Regulations (L.I. 2504), improve capacity for land acquisition and resettlement, and
enhance OHS oversight in line with national legislation and the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). These
interventions are critical given the high incidence of transport sector-related community and occupational health and
safety (C/OHS) risks, including fatalities and serious injuries, as well as delays in providing right-of-way access due to gaps
in asset valuation and resettlement practices. Such challenges result in increased human and financial costs, including lost
time and contractor claims.
36.     Activities will be implemented in a phased manner, prioritizing those critical for project implementation and
aligned with the project cycle. The subcomponent will also support citizen engagement, as well as measures to prevent
and mitigate gender-based violence (GBV), including sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH) and
violence against children (VAC) risks associated with civil works, along with their monitoring.
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component CERC (US$0 million)
37.     A CERC is included in the project in accordance with Investment Project Financing (IPF) Policy, paragraphs 12 and
13, for Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance and Capacity Constraints. This will allow for rapid reallocation of loan
uncommitted funds in the event of an eligible emergency. To meet CERC activation requirements, the GoG will prepare a
CERC Manual, submit an Emergency Action Plan (EAP), and meet the environmental and social (E&S) requirements agreed
in the EAP and Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).
                                      Table 1: Indicative Costs and Financing (US$, million)
                           Project Componentsa                              Indicative         IDA            GoG
                                                                              Costs
      1: Rehabilitation of Feeder Roads                                       473              473             0
      1.1: Improvement of all-weather road access from farm-gates to          453              453             0
      markets
      1.2: Supervision of Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Works            18              18              0
      1.3: Implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan Costs                2               2               0
      2: Road Maintenance and Support to the Road Maintenance                  41              18              23
      Trust Fund Reform
      2.1: Maintenance of Feeder Roads                                         36              13              23

                                                                                                                        Page 9
        The World Bank
        Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                Project Componentsa                                  Indicative            IDA                  GoG
                                                                                       Costs
       2.2 (a): Road Maintenance Trust Fund Reform Support                              2                   2                    0
       2.2 (b): RAMS support through WIGRAMS                                            3                   3                    0
       3: Project Management and Implementation Support                                  9                  9                    0
       3.1: Project Management and implementation support                                8                  8                    0
       3.2: Strengthening Ghana’s national environmental and social                      1                  1                    0
       institutional capacity and operational effectiveness for improved
       Environmental, Social, Health and Safety outcomes
       4: CERC                                                                           0                 0
       Total                                                                            523               500                   23
      Note: a. Contingencies are included in the activities cost.

 E. Role of Partners

38.     The GoG’s initial project concept envisaged rehabilitating 5,000 km of feeder roads nationwide, of which the
project is financing the first 1,050 km. This first phase prioritizes road segments with high crop productivity and poor
connectivity, where constraints have significant implications for food inflation and food security. There is a clear
opportunity to mobilize additional partnerships to scale up beyond the currently financed scope and, over time, move
toward the original ambition. Such expansion would help achieve larger-scale impacts on agricultural productivity by
improving rural connectivity.
39.     Development partners such as the European Union, the African Development Bank, the Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank, and others could act as financiers should the Government seek to expand the project scope by
mobilizing additional borrowing.

 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design

40.      The proposed project design builds on country-specific lessons and international best practices in road transport
and asset management. Lessons were drawn from the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) of the Ghana
TSIP (P151026) (closed on June 30, 2025), complemented by experience from rural connectivity programs in Africa (Mali,
Nigeria, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia), Latin America (Ecuador, Guatemala, Brazil), and South and East Asia (Nepal and the
Philippines), among others, which provide relevant insights into improving agricultural connectivity and road asset
management.19
         (a)    Use of a multicriteria framework approach to prioritize feeder roads. The Haiti Rural Accessibility and
                Resilience Project (P163490) applied a multicriteria approach that enabled flexible and responsive
                implementation, allowing interventions to adapt to local needs and evolving circumstances and thereby
                improving delivery effectiveness. The approach prioritized regions during preparation and finalized site-
                specific road selection during implementation through a participatory process with stakeholders, enhancing
                impact while maintaining simple objectives that facilitated scale-up. This framework also creates
                opportunities to mobilize partnerships and additional financing to support the GoG’s ambition to rehabilitate
                5,000 km of feeder roads nationwide. It is particularly suited to delivering the Ghana Market Access and

19 Examples include Mali Rural Mobility and Connectivity Project (P160505); Nigeria Rural Access and Agricultural Marketing Project (P163353);

Côte d’Ivoire Inclusive Connectivity and Rural Infrastructure Project (P178362); Ethiopia Roads Development Program-for-Results (P176303);
Republic of Guyana, Integrated Transport Corridors Project - (P501759); Ecuador Guayas: Resilient Rural Roads (P504400); Guatemala Rural
Infrastructure and Mobility for Good Living Program (P178573); Brazil Santa Catarina Rural Development Project for Sustainability and Innovation
(P506142); Nepal Rural Enterprise and Economic Development Project – REED (P170215); and Philippines Rural Development Project Scale-up
(P180379).

                                                                                                                                          Page 10
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


              Connectivity Project (GMACP) under tight timelines, as it allows road selection to be refined during
              implementation, strengthening stakeholder engagement and maximizing impact. Accordingly, the GMACP
              adopts a three-step multicriteria framework approach, with final road selection undertaken during
              implementation to ensure flexibility and responsiveness to local needs.
        (b)   Road surface design (to pave or not to pave). The World Bank has developed various tools to assess optimal
              road surface design. Among them, SPADE-PLUS is a multicriteria framework for deciding whether to pave
              rural, low-volume roads, incorporating social, environmental, and climate benefits beyond traditional
              economic analysis. It uses a two-stage process: prioritization through weighted criteria (SPADE), followed by
              economic or cost-effectiveness analysis based on traffic levels. The economic analysis aspect uses tools like
              the Roads Economic Decision (RED) model, which evaluates the economic viability of investment and
              maintenance projects for low volume, primarily rural roads. It uses a consumer surplus approach to estimate
              benefits, such as vehicle operating cost savings, reduced travel time, and improved road safety. The SPADE-
              PLUS model which will inform the project’s road design surface and economic indicators presents a more
              holistic assessment of the economic viability of low volume or rural roads beyond the traffic volumes thereby
              allowing for resilient surfaces where funding availability and climate hazards prevail.
        (c)   Contract for maintenance. Under TSIP (P151026), combining rehabilitation and maintenance under a single
              Output and Performance-Based Road Contract (OPBRC) delayed the start of maintenance and reduced its
              effectiveness. In addition, the GoG did not provide funding for post-rehabilitation maintenance contracts
              even six months after project closure, resulting in contract non-performance. To mitigate this, the project
              separates rehabilitation and maintenance contracts and introduces safeguards to ensure counterpart
              funding is made available for maintenance.
        (d)   Strengthening road fund Governance. Experience in addressing persistent road maintenance challenges
              shows that weak governance, insufficient revenue sustainability, and limited use of evidence-based planning
              constrain maintenance outcomes. Lessons learned highlight the importance of supporting road fund reforms
              to strengthen institutional and legal frameworks, improve revenue collection and allocation efficiency, and
              align financing with HDM-4–based maintenance needs and regional good practices. They also underscore
              the value of combining analytical assessments, financial modeling, data-driven tools, and capacity building
              in asset management systems to improve maintenance prioritization, operational efficiency, and long-term
              asset sustainability which the project will seek to address.
        (e)   OHS and safeguard monitoring. Experience across the World Bank transport portfolio indicates persistently
              high levels of OHS incidents and fatalities during project implementation.


 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

41.      The project will be implemented by the MRH. The MRH will be responsible for overall project oversight, strategic
decision-making, road fund reforms, activities under Component 2, and preparation of the Project Implementation
Manual (PIM). The project governance structure will include (a) a Steering Committee; (b) a dedicated, full-time Project
Coordinator (PC) to coordinate the activities of the two implementation teams, lead the preparation of the annual work
plans and budget for the project for approval by the SC and clearance by the World Bank, and report to the World Bank;
and (c) two Agency Implementation Teams (AITs), located within the DFR and MRH.
42.   The SC will review and approve annual work plans and budgets, provide policy and program guidance, oversee
implementation progress, and ensure coordination among stakeholders. It will be chaired by the Minister of Roads and

                                                                                                                   Page 11
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Highways, directly supported by the Chief Director of the MRH as a technical lead, and will include director-level
representatives from the Ministry of Finance (MoF), Lands Commission, DFR, Minister of Roads and Highway, EPA, and
MoFA. The MoF will support disbursement approvals and interim financial reports (IFRs), in line with its mandate, while
the Lands Commission will support land acquisition processes, and the EPA will provide guidance and approvals related to
environmental compliance, including quarries and borrow pits. The Steering Committee will meet quarterly or more often
as needed. The PC will play the role of Steering Committee’s secretary. The AITs will be headed by full-time managers and
composed of dedicated (full-time) staff to the project or consultants where capacity gaps exist. The DFR AIT will include
regional teams to support the day-to-day monitoring of civil works and maintenance. The DFR will lead implementation
of Component 1, while the MRH will lead Component 2.
43.    An organogram of the project institutional arrangements is provided in annex 3, and detailed implementation
arrangements will be outlined in the PIM.

 B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements

44.      The PC will be responsible for reporting on progress under the project’s M&E framework (annex 1). The AITs
will support data collection, analysis, and preparation of monthly reports, and the PC may have an assistant or draw on
staff from the M&E units of the MRH or DFR as needed. The PC will submit updated Results Frameworks to the World
Bank as part of the biannual progress report, within 45 days of the end of each reporting period. These reports will include
information on contract commitments, disbursements, FM, procurement, and compliance with E&S requirements, as well
as updated annual work plans. In addition, monthly progress reports will be submitted by the MRH and DFR through the
PC. The World Bank will conduct implementation support missions at least twice a year, including field visits and ongoing
technical, fiduciary, and E&S reviews.
45.     In addition, the GoG and the World Bank will conduct a midterm review (MTR) between 24 and 36 months
following the effectiveness of the Financing Agreement. The MTR will assess the relevance of the PDO and progress
toward outcomes. Its findings may confirm the original project design or propose restructuring, as agreed between the
GoG and the World Bank. The GoG will also prepare its own implementation completion report in the final year of
implementation and submit it to the World Bank no later than six months after the closing date. The AITs will be
responsible for preparing these reports with technical assistance from M&E specialists where needed.
46.      A PIM will be prepared by the MRH as the key implementing agency. The PIM will include all procedures, rules,
and standards for implementation of the project, including, but not limited to, (a) institutional arrangements; (b) AIT
operations; (c) roles, responsibilities, and terms of reference (ToR) of AIT members; (d) eligibility requirements for project
activities; (e) project planning and M&E; (f) E&S management, reporting, client communication, and human resources; (g)
procurement; (h) administrative processes and FM; (i) grievance procedures; (j) a negative list of activities not eligible for
financing; and (k) procedures for amending the PIM.

 C. Disbursement Arrangements

47.      Disbursements will be made in accordance with the provisions of the Disbursement Guidelines for Investment
Project Financing (February 2017), the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter (DFIL), and the Financing
Agreement. It will be made primarily as advances for eligible expenditures, with IFRs to be submitted quarterly. The IFRs
will serve as the basis for withdrawals from the World Bank. To draw down funds, the key implementing agencies will be
required to share an approved Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) for the World Bank’s no-objection before the end
of each calendar year. The ceiling will be the expenditure forecast for six months. Both the MRH and DFR are required to
open a US dollar-DA to receive funds from IDA and open a New Ghanaian Cedi (GHS) operational account to draw down
funds from the US dollar-DA to fund daily operational expenditure. Counterpart funding will be provided by the GoG in


                                                                                                                      Page 12
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


parallel, through a third GHS operational account under the DFR to cover the road maintenance contract. All accounts are
to be opened at the Bank of Ghana (BoG) and should be for project activities only.
                                       Figure 4. Funds Flow under the Proposed Project




48.      Once the bank accounts are opened, the MoF is required to formally notify the World Bank of the bank’s US dollar
account name, number, and other relevant details to be set up in the World Bank’s Client Connection system. The
notification should include the details of all signatories on the account. The project financial reports will be generated
using the Ghana Integrated Financial Management Information System (GIFMIS). Bank reconciliations should be prepared
monthly for the US dollar DAs and the GHS operational accounts.
49.     As specified for Component 2, disbursements for rehabilitation works under Clusters 3 and 4 will be conditional
upon the provision of counterpart funding for maintenance of the rehabilitated roads under Clusters 1 and 2. Also, full
release of IDA funds for the rehabilitation of Clusters 3 and 4 will be conditional upon the full contribution of counterpart
funding for maintenance. This condition is reflected in the Financing Agreement.

 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY
 A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis
(i)     Technical Analysis
50.      To date, the first step of the prioritization framework has been completed, resulting in the identification of four
priority clusters (See annex). The prioritization sought to link high yam, maize and rice production areas to market through
road networks that are in poor to fair conditions, are most critical and provide short paths to optimize on travel time.
        •    Cluster 1 is anchored in some districts in the Upper West, Northern, and Savannah regions, such as Sissala
             West, where high maize and rice production (93rd percentile nationally) contrasts with poor connectivity,
             with about one-third of feeder roads in poor condition. Food insecurity is also high (26.9 percent; 85th
             percentile), reinforcing the case for interventions to stabilize local supply. To the south of the Savannah
             region, Bole District hosts one of the 24 major agricultural markets identified by MoFA, strengthening
             commercialization prospects. Some high-ranking districts to the east of the Cluster (for example, West
             Mamprusi and Karaga) were excluded, as more than 1,600 km of feeder road works are already under way—
             placing them above the 98th and 94th percentiles nationally in ongoing investments.
        •    Cluster 2, located around Lake Volta in the Oti, Volta, and Eastern regions, combines strong agricultural
             potential with significant connectivity gaps. For example, Biakoye District ranks in the 91st percentile for
             strategic crop production, yet about two-thirds of its feeder road network is in poor condition. The cluster


                                                                                                                     Page 13
        The World Bank
        Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                also overlaps with ongoing IFC-supported investments around Lake Volta, creating opportunities for
                coordination and stronger market linkages.
         •      Cluster 3 encompasses districts in the Ashanti, Bono, Bono East, and Eastern regions, such as Kintampo North
                and Nkoranza North, which remain consistently prioritized across alternative weighting scenarios, alongside
                Wenchi and Kintampo South. Sensitivity analysis confirms their robustness in the ranking. The cluster
                extends eastward toward Lake Volta to include Kwahu Afram Plains North and South, a major food-producing
                area.
         •      Cluster 4, sitting across the regions of Ahafo, Central, Western, and Western North, is characterized by a
                high concentration of feeder roads in poor condition. Districts such as Bia East (about 70 percent of roads in
                poor condition) and Suaman (about 85 percent) rank among the most constrained nationally. The cluster
                also includes key commercial nodes, including Bibiani, Kotokuraba (Cape Coast), and Mankessim, which serve
                as important market hubs.
51.      The next stage, which is the road selection, will identify and prioritize the feeder roads within the four selected
clusters in poor or fair surface conditions that are most critical and provide short paths to optimize travel time between
the farm gate to markets. The selection process will ensure the elimination of roads already under contract. Where the
connection from farms to markets include a trunk road, the feeder roads linked to trunk roads in good condition will be
prioritized over those connected to poor or fair one.


(ii)     Economic Analysis
52.      An economic analysis was conducted during project appraisal for both paved and unpaved feeder road sections
using the RED Model. The analysis evaluates representative sections of 100 km each over a 20-year period at an 8 percent
discount rate.20 It quantifies benefits including (a) travel time savings, (b) VOC savings, (c) reductions in road crashes, and
(d) greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions. The ex-ante results indicate that the project is economically justified, with
an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) ranging from 14.1 to 17.8 percent (paved and unpaved, respectively) and a net
present value (NPV) between US$18.9 million and US$20.6 million. Extrapolating the results from the 100 km to the full
program (1,050 km) suggests a portfolio NPV in the range of approximately US$198.5–216.3 million. These estimates are
indicative and will be refined once the final road sections are selected and subjected to detailed economic appraisal. They
are also likely to understate the project’s full economic value, as they do not capture wider benefits, which are discussed
in the following paragraphs.
53.     A comparison of the economic indicator of similar projects in Ghana showed similar results. The recent TSIP
(P151026) in Ghana estimated economic rates of return for rural road rehabilitation and maintenance interventions
ranged from 8 to 17 percent, depending on the surfacing type. Similarly, the road investments under the Millennium
Challenge Corporation (MCC) in Ghana reported ex ante EIRRs of 36 percent for highways, 17 percent for trunk roads, and
18 percent for feeder roads.21
54.      Feeder road investments in Ghana can contribute to job creation both during construction and through longer-
term expansion of local economic activity. Evidence from comparable road programs suggests that bituminous
rehabilitation typically generates about 5–10 direct jobs per US$1 million, while gravel rehabilitation or re-gravelling—
being more labor-intensive—can generate about 15–25 jobs per US$1 million. These estimates are indicative and depend
on local labor costs, construction methods, and skills availability. Assuming that 70 percent of project resources are
allocated to bituminous works and 30 percent to gravel roads, the project could generate approximately 4,000–7,500

20 The discount rate was selected in line with the World Bank’s social discounting approach, under which the discount rate is approximated as twice

the per capita growth rate. Source: World Bank Open Data. GDP per capita growth (annual %) — Ghana. Retrieved April 1, 2026.
21 MCC (Millennium Challenge Corporation). 2020. Evaluation Brief| September 2020 Improving Roads to Reduce Transportation Costs in Ghana.


                                                                                                                                          Page 14
           The World Bank
           Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                           PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


short-term direct jobs over the implementation period, or roughly 4,500–7,500 job-years, during the construction phase.
Long-term indirect employment effects could also be substantial. Estimates using the Jobs Corporate Scorecard
methodology suggest up to 43,642 indirect jobs (new or better jobs), consistent with evidence showing increased local
economic activity linked to transport, trade, and agribusiness services.22
55.     The benefits of improved feeder roads—often a binding constraint for the agriculture sector—are wide-ranging,
spanning productivity gains and human capital development through multiple channels. Improved feeder roads can
reduce post-harvest losses by up to 30 percent23 and facilitate access to inputs such as seeds, fertilizers, and veterinary
services.24 Better rural connectivity also supports broader agricultural transformation: livestock corridors can enhance
mobility and trade,25 while improved logistics can stimulate agro-processing and private investment.26 These gains can
translate into higher farm incomes, expanded rural non-farm employment,27 and greater participation of women and
youth.28 Improved connectivity can also reduce rural isolation, strengthen links to value chains and essential services, and
help moderate distress-driven rural-urban migration.29
56.     Furthermore, these improvements are expected to generate welfare gains through stronger market integration
and reduce price distortions. Improved rural roads can narrow farm-to-market price gaps,30 provides better connectivity
that reduce the prices of traded goods in remote areas by lowering transaction costs,31 and supports poverty reduction
through improved access and expanded market opportunities.32 For Ghana, illustratively, a 10–20 percent reduction in
transport costs could increase farm-gate prices by 4–8 percent while reducing consumer food prices by 5–12 percent.33
The benefits of road improvements extend well beyond immediate transport savings by capturing dynamic spillovers such
as reduced marketing margins, improved capital allocation, and increased labor utilization.34 These dynamic effects
account for more than 95 percent of lifetime GDP gains, with socioeconomic spillovers representing about half of the total.
(iii)      GHG Emission Calculation
57.    As part of the economic analysis conducted under a framework approach, an ex-ante assessment and
monetization of the project’s gross and net GHG emissions were undertaken.
           •    Based on RED model simulations, the project intervention is expected to increase total CO₂ emissions by
                13,63 tons per kilometer per year following road rehabilitation. The project’s primary impact on GHG
                emissions arises from feeder road rehabilitation investments, which are expected to modify baseline
                emissions through two main channels: (a) an increase of traffic volumes due to improved road conditions

22 Ibid.
23 MoFA (Ministry of Food and Agriculture). 2021. Agriculture Sector Progress Report.
24 World Bank. (2011). Transport and Agriculture: Rural Roads and Agricultural Development.
25 FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization. 2019. Livestock Mobility and Trade Corridors in West Africa: Improving Market Access and Pastoral

Resilience.
26 OECD. 2020. Global Value Chains and Agricultural Development: Implications for Infrastructure and Logistics.
27 United Nations ESCAP. 2017. Shifting from Quantity to Quality: Growth with Equality, Efficiency, Sustainability and Dynamism.
28 FAO. 2017. Youth and Agriculture: Key Challenges and Concrete Solutions.
29 World Bank. 2016. Why Transport Matters: Toward Sustainable Mobility for All; and World Bank. 2024. Transport Connectivity and Inclusive Growth:

Global Evidence and Policy Lessons.
30 Herrera Dappe, M., C. Kunaka, J. Nash, and A. Suarez-Aleman. 2021. Connecting to Thrive: Challenges and Opportunities of Transport Integration

in Eastern and Southern Africa. World Bank.
31 Aggarwal, S. 2018. “Do Rural Roads Create Pathways out of Poverty? Evidence from India.” Journal of Development Economics 133, 375–395.Darko,

E., and A. Löwe. 2016). Ghana's Construction Sector and Youth Employment. London: Overseas Development Institute.
32 Khandker, S. R., Z. Bakht, and G. Koolwal. 2009. “The Poverty Impact of Rural Roads: Evidence from Bangladesh.” Economic Development and

Cultural Change 57 (4), 685–722.
33 Food products include tomatoes, yam, maize, rice and imported stapples. This estimation is for illustrative purpose. No recent specific study in

Ghana was identified determining the price elasticity of food prices respect to key production inputs, however, a literature review contributed to
identify applicable elasticities for different agricultural products.
34 Jensen, H. T. 2009. General Equilibrium Analysis of Road Investments in Ghana. World Bank.


                                                                                                                                          Page 15
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


             and reduced Vehicle Operating Costs, (VOC) s and (b) an increase in fuel consumption due to improved
             vehicle speeds.
        •    The financial implications of changes in emissions are then assessed using both the low and high Shadow
             Price of Carbon (SPC) estimates provided in the 2024 World Bank Guidance Note on Shadow Price of Carbon
             in Economic Analysis, adjusted using the US CPI to express results in constant 2026 US dollars. When
             incorporating the SPC under both average scenarios, the EIRR are 13.9 percent and 17.7 percent
             (unpaved/paved).
(iv)    Paris Alignment
58.      The project supports Ghana’s climate commitments as outlined in its Updated Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC, 2021–2030) and the ongoing Nationally determined Contributions (NDC) 3.0 revision process.
Ghana’s NDC includes mitigation and adaptation measures across key sectors, including transport, with priorities on
sustainable mobility, resilient infrastructure, disaster risk management, and nature-based solutions. The project
contributes to these priorities by enhancing climate-resilient transport infrastructure and promoting low-carbon mobility
options consistent with national development and climate policies. The operation is aligned with the mitigation and
adaptation goals of the Paris Agreement and supports Ghana’s efforts to strengthen resilience to climate hazards. These
priorities are also consistent with Ghana’s CCDR, which emphasizes climate-proofing transport infrastructure and
improving resilience to climate shocks.
59.     Mitigation. The project finances the improvement and rehabilitation of existing feeder roads without capacity
expansion, thereby avoiding induced emissions and land-use change. By integrating transport infrastructure and road
safety measures, it also promotes more sustainable mobility patterns that can help reduce transport-related emissions.
The project activities are considered universally aligned.
60.     Adaptation. The project targets areas exposed to flooding, heavy rainfall, and climate-related infrastructure
degradation. It incorporates climate-resilient road designs, upgraded drainage systems, and improved year-round
accessibility on vulnerable feeder roads, while supporting enhanced asset management and climate-responsive
maintenance planning. Therefore, the adaptation risks are reduced to an acceptable level. These measures are aligned
with the Ghana CCDR, which highlights the need to integrate climate risk into road design, strengthen maintenance
practices, and invest in resilient drainage systems to address increasingly frequent flooding and intense rainfall. The report
also identifies inadequate maintenance and drainage as key vulnerabilities in Ghana’s road network, underscoring the
importance of climate-proofing infrastructure and strengthening long-term asset management. These measures are also
consistent with Ghana’s National Adaptation Plan and its commitments for the transport and infrastructure sectors.
(v)     Maximizing finance for development
61.     The Program is aligned with the World Bank MFD approach and contributes towards Private Capital Private
Capital Enabled (PCE). The following components and activities are verified as MFD-E: (i) Component 1 enables private
participation through corridor upgrades, road safety, and policy reforms that attract private investors. In collaboration
with IFC, the road selection process will also prioritize access to warehouses and logistics facilities within targeted
agricultural clusters. Improved connectivity between production areas, markets, and storage facilities is expected to
strengthen value chains and support greater capital mobilization for SMEs. Additional opportunities may take place on
agri-business and logistics platforms, (ii) Component 2 strengthens maintenance through performance-based contracts
and sustainability reforms, ensuring the durability of rehabilitation investments and creating an enabling environment for
private investors and SMEs along the corridor. Collectively, these efforts create conditions for increased private sector
participation in infrastructure.




                                                                                                                      Page 16
        The World Bank
        Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


(vi)     Other Considerations
62.      Citizen engagement. The project adopts a framework centered on active citizen engagement throughout road
selection and implementation. During preparation, the DFR consulted key institutions, including the EPA, LVD, and MoFA,
which provided data on crop production areas. Focus group discussions were also conducted with traders and tricycle
riders in the different selected communities
63.     During implementation, the project will continue consultations and validation at key milestones such as
commencement of works with affected communities and vulnerable groups—including women, persons with disabilities
and underserved traditional local communities—to ensure feedback is incorporated into project design and delivery.
Citizen engagement will, however, continue throughout the project tenure in addition to the ones at key milestones.
Information will be disseminated through social and local media platforms, including gender and road safety activities.
64.      A GRM with multiple uptake channels will be established to ensure timely resolution of complaints, including
confidential handling of potential SEA/SH cases and labor grievances. Community-based monitoring, supported by local
leaders and community representatives, will be used to strengthen oversight. Through this project, a community scorecard
will be implemented to ensure the population’s reporting of project activities. In addition, satisfaction surveys will be
conducted to capture beneficiary feedback on project implementation and results. Results of these surveys will be
analyzed and inform project implementation. In addition, surveys and other consultations will also be shared with targeted
communities to close the feedback loop.
65.     Road safety. Since the project roads will be selected during implementation, the World Bank’s Road Safety
Screening and Appraisal Tool (RSSAT) cannot be applied at this stage. Once the roads are identified and design studies are
underway, RSSAT will be utilized to ensure that road safety interventions are incorporated, ensuring the project has a
positive impact on safety. Additionally, the project will include road safety inspections and audits, which will identify
further safety enhancements beyond the minimum standards assessed by RSSAT. These will be complemented by speed
management interventions, International Road Assessment Program (IRAP) assessments of the main network, pilot
interventions on high-risk locations, capacity-building initiatives, and awareness-raising campaigns, focusing on high-risk
areas, such as schools, health centers, and markets, where vulnerable road users are concentrated.
66.      Gender. The project will address gender disparities in transport labor force participation and rural roads in
alignment with the World Bank Group Gender Strategy (2024–2030) and the Ghana National Gender Policy.35 Women’s
recruitment and retention through the civil works contracts aims to enhance women’s participation. This effort to promote
women’s employment will be complemented by a certification training program targeting more women participation to
be delivered by Technical and Vocational Education and Training Center, the MRH through the Koforidua Training Center
(KTC) in Ghana, coupled with mentorship programs to support women’s access to medium-/high-skilled and long-term
jobs in road construction, road maintenance, driving of heavy machinery including bulldozers, rollers and graders and
operation of paving equipment with private contractors in line with the inclusive road maintenance objective under the
2025 RMTF Act. The IA will identify accredited training institutions and support the enrollment of women in these
programs. Some barriers to women’s participation will be addressed by providing flexible training schedules and rolling
out recruitment campaigns in partnership with some women’s associations. Subcomponent 1.1 will finance rural roads
that better connect farms to markets to strengthen efficient connectivity, market access, and reduce loss of income for
women traders. These roads will be selected through a combination of a prioritization framework as described in annex
2, coupled with consultations with women to identify specific segments to be rehabilitated that will disproportionately
benefit women’s farmers. The project will track results from these interventions through these three indicators: (a)
number of women beneficiaries from the rehabilitated roads, (b) number of women hired in medium and high skills jobs



35 Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection (2015) National Gender Policy.


                                                                                                                   Page 17
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


in the construction and maintenance road works, and (c) number of women certified in construction and maintenance
programs.
67.      Project implementation readiness. IDA has extended a grant of US$1.5 million to GoG to finance preparatory
activities that will inform road selection and other activities, including Project Procurement Strategy for Development
(PPSD) and ESF development, and TA to ensure compliance of the project with procurement and ENS procedures. The
grant will finance operational costs related to feasibility and detailed design studies for the selected roads and a climate
vulnerability assessment to inform the road design. The feasibility and detailed design studies being undertaken by the
client will be informed by the roads selected from the prioritization analysis. The feasibility and detailed design studies
will prioritize the first cluster to advance procurement of the road rehabilitation for Cluster 1. Mobilization to commence
both studies has begun, with the DFR having developed the ToR to guide the studies. Two individual consultants will also
be hired through the grant to provide TA to the DFR on both the feasibility and detailed design studies.
 B. Fiduciary
 (i) Financial Management
68.      A preliminary FM assessment was conducted at the MRH for the Ghana Market Access and Connectivity
Program, in accordance with the FM Manual for World Bank Investment Project Financing (IPF) Operations, dated
March 1, 2010, and revised in September 2021, and supporting World Bank IPF directives and policies. The objective of
the assessment was to determine whether FM arrangements at the MRH and DFR (a) can correctly and completely record
all project transactions and balances; (b) can facilitate the preparation of regular, timely, and reliable financial statements;
(c) safeguard the project’s assets; and (d) are subject to auditing arrangements acceptable to the World Bank.
69.     Overall, the project’s FM arrangements are deemed adequate and meet the World Bank’s minimum
requirements under IPF policies and directives. Given that the MRH has experience managing World Bank-financed
projects such as the TSIP (P151026) and both the MRH and DFR’s assessment meet the minimum requirements per IDA
policy and directives on IPF, the project will rely on the MRH and DFR’s current FM systems.
70.    Recommendations have been provided to further strengthen the FM arrangements at each implementing
agency. The residual risk rating for the project is assessed as Moderate. Through implementation, the MRH and DFR will
be required to ensure that adequate FM arrangements are in place and that the project complies with all financial
covenants detailed in the Financing Agreement and the DFIL.
71.      The MRH and DFR will be the main implementing agencies for the project. While MRH responsible for
Subcomponent 2.2 of the project, the DFR will be responsible for Component 1 and Subcomponent 2.1. Both will also
benefit from Component 3 as part of their project management responsibility. The MRH Chief Director has overall fiduciary
responsibility of both the MRH and DFR activities through the Head of Accounts and Finance for the MRH and through the
DFR Head of Accounts. Both the Heads of Accounts will have support from their respective Senior/Principal Accountants.
In terms of banking arrangements, both the MRH and DFR are required to open a US dollar-DA to receive funds from IDA
and open a GHS-denominated operational account for day-to-day transactions, both at the BoG. Counterpart funding will
be provided by the GoG in parallel, through the project GHS operational account. In terms of disbursements, proceeds of
the facility will be used for eligible expenditures as defined in the Financing Agreement. The disbursement categories are
designed to allow flexibility and are based on project components, and each component would fund eligible expenditures
in the areas of civil works, goods, consultancy services, and operating costs. Based on the FM assessment, the credit
proceeds for each of the respective IA will be disbursed to the project using report-based disbursement (IFRs)
arrangement. Subsequent replenishments of the DA would be done quarterly based on the forecast of the net
expenditures for the subsequent six months after the first quarter and on duly approved withdrawal applications
submitted by the respective implementing agencies and supported by IFRs. Additional instructions for disbursements,
including categories, will be provided through the DFIL.

                                                                                                                        Page 18
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


72.      The project financial reports will be generated using GIFMIS. Bank reconciliations should be prepared monthly
for the US dollar-DA and the GHS operational account. Financial reporting under the GHS operational account must show
World Bank advances and withdrawals separately from counterpart contributions and spending, within the same IFR. To
ensure transparency and traceability in FM, the MRH and DFR will be rolled out on the World Bank’s FundsChain platform.
73.     Strengths identified during the assessment of the MRH and DFR include the following: (a) both the implementing
agencies have satisfactory budgeting processes to ensure inclusion of planned activities and the GIFMIS monitors budget
execution to avoid cost overruns; (b) the accounting units at the MRH and DFR are well staffed with adequate segregation
of duties; (c) each of them follow accounting policies and procedures as outlined in the Public Financial Management
Regulations, 2019 (L.I. 2378) in processing financial transactions; (d) the MRH has experience in managing World Bank
projects and satisfactory external audit arrangements.
74.     Risks identified during the assessment at both the MRH and DFR include (a) budgets (AWPBs) prepared outside
GIFMIS, which may lead to weak budget scrutiny and delays in the submission of the AWPB to the World Bank for
no‑objection; (b) unrealistic budget estimates; (c) inadequate explanation of budget variances; (d) delays in setting up the
project in GIFMIS and incomplete data entry in FundsChain; (e) delayed submission of risk‑based internal post-audit
reports; (f) weak transaction controls; (g) delays in bank reconciliations; (h) noncompliance with payment voucher
approval procedures; (i) excessive cash payments to third parties; (j) delays in payments to suppliers and beneficiaries; (k)
late submission of IFRs; (l) delayed preparation of annual financial statements; (m) processing transactions outside GIFMIS;
(n) late submission of audited financial statements and management letters; (o) the borrower fails to disburse
counterparts funds ; (p) delay in release of funds ; (q) commingling of counterpart and WBG funds without clear ledgers,
leading to reporting difficulties; (r) exchange rate risks when converting GoG GHS contributions to US dollars for reporting
purposes; and (s) weak borrower controls in the use of the counterpart contributions.
75.      To mitigate these risks, the MRH and DFR (a) should ensure the timely preparation and submission of the AWPB
for integration into the national budget and submit it to the World Bank for no‑objection by November 30 of the preceding
year; (b) the AWPB will be based on realistic assumptions; (c) quarterly variance analysis reports will clearly explain
differences between actual and budgeted expenditures; (d) the project will be configured in GIFMIS and go live on the
FundsChain platform no later than one month after effectiveness; (e) the MRH and DFR will comply with the Public
Financial Management Regulations, 2019 (L.I. 2378) and the Public Financial Management (PFM) Act, 2016 (Act 921); (f)
the Internal Audit Unit at the MRH will include the project in its annual work plan and submit post‑audit reports to the
World Bank at least twice a year to cover MRH and DFR activities; (g) monthly bank reconciliation statements will be
prepared and reviewed within 10 days after month‑end; (h) a petty cash threshold will be enforced, with payments above
the threshold made through bank transfer or cheque; (i) procedures will be included in the PIM to ensure timely payments
to suppliers and beneficiaries; (j) beneficiary agencies will retire expenditures promptly; (k) quarterly IFRs will be
submitted within 45 days after the end of each quarter; (l) annual financial statements will be prepared within two months
of year‑end; (m) all project transactions will be processed through GIFMIS; (n) World Bank funding is not disbursed until
the agreed GoG contribution is paid into the project account; (o) there is a stand-alone GHS account to receive counterpart
funding; and (p) audited financial statements and Management Letters will be submitted to the World Bank no later than
June 30 each year. Like the TSIP (P151026), there will be one audit report to cover MRH and DFR activities, and the MRH,
as the parent ministry, will be responsible to ensure that the audited financials and Management Letter is submitted on
time, in accordance with the legal covenants. The DFR is required to ensure that its annual financial statements are ready
for the auditors’ review no later than two months after the calendar year end.
(ii)    Procurement
76.     Procurement management. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s ‘Procurement
Regulations for IPF Borrowers’ (Procurement Regulations), 7th Edition, dated September 2025, and the Guidelines on
Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants’, dated

                                                                                                                     Page 19
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


July 1, 2016, as well as other provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. The Procurement Plan will be prepared in
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP), based on the PPSD, and will be updated as and when required.
The World Bank Standard Procurement Documents will be used for international procurements; when approaching the
national market, the national procurement procedures in Ghana public procurement law may apply, subject to Clauses
5.3 to 5.6 of the Procurement Regulations.
77.    Procurement arrangements. The proposed implementing agencies for the project are the MRH and DFR, and both
agencies are declared procurement agencies per the Ghana public procurement law as well as have the required
procurement structures in place. The nominated procurement specialist (PS) of the MRH has experience on World Bank-
funded projects and will hand-hold the counterpart DFR PS, who has limited World Bank procurement experience, with
the World Bank’s support.
78.      The key procurement activities are the construction of 1,050 km feeder roads (multiple contracts estimated in
total at US$453 million), construction supervision consultancy (multiple contracts estimated in total at US$18 million),
rehabilitation of 1,050 km of feeder roads (multiple contracts estimated in total at US$13 million from IDA credit and
US$13 million from GoG funding), and consultancy for RMTF reforms (US$5 million). However, the feasibility studies for
the road selection and detailed design are undertaken in-house by the DFR’s technical team.
79.      In accordance with the Procurement Regulations, the AITs shall (a) consider the aggregation of road contracts
into larger clusters, (b) use the SEA/SH disqualification mechanism and Dispute Avoidance/Adjudication Board (DAAB) for
the main works contracts, and (c) use direct payment mechanism to contractors.
80.      A PPSD has been developed by the borrower. The PPSD development, which is part of the preparatory activities
financed under the project preparation grant extended to the GoG, proposed the sequencing and optimal packaging of
the works based on the analysis of contracting market capacity, implementation timelines, geographic locations, and
associated risks. The PPSD explored opportunities to aggregate smaller contracts into larger clusters. It concluded that
road construction and rehabilitation are simple works which are better suited for execution by national contractors. The
market assessment confirmed that adequate capacity exists within the national market to ensure adequate competition
and to execute the works within the project duration. Thus, works have been divided into multiple lots and aggregated
into four procurement clusters (one cluster per geographic region). The number of lots has been optimized to ensure
effective supervision and quality control. Procurement for each of the clusters will follow an open competitive process
(Request for Bids) and a national market approach. Likewise, multiple construction supervision firms will be recruited (two
for each cluster). To expedite implementation and disbursements immediately after effectiveness, the borrower is
undertaking feasibility studies and agreed to prioritize the preparation of detailed designs, Bill of Quantities, location-
specific E&S requirements, and procurement documents for a first batch of road works and the selection of construction
supervision consultants, in anticipation for advance procurement.
81.      Inherent procurement risks are thus (a) the DFR-proposed PS has extensive public procurement experience but
limited procurement capacity in the World Bank Procurement Regulations; (b) delay in completion of the feasibility
studies, road selection and design, as well as preparation of the bidding document; (c) delay in obtaining the MoF
commitment authorization; (d) lengthy GoG procurement processing and approval timelines, including due to low
thresholds for procurement approval by the Entity Tender Committee (ETC)/ Central Tender Review Committee (CTRC)
affecting post review activities; and (d) contract implementation challenges resulting in cost and time overruns due to
payment delays, poor record keeping, and bureaucratic bottlenecks. The procurement risk mitigation measures proposed
are (a) hand-holding of the counterpart DFR PS by the MRH PS, with the World Bank’s support; (b) timely preparation of
feasibility studies, design, and road selection by project approval, and fast-tracking readiness of the first batch for advance
procurement if possible; (c) early engagement of the MoF for timely issuance of commitment authorization; (d) the recent
approval by the Parliament of the revised country thresholds for procurement methods and procurement approval, which
is expected to speed up procurement processing and approval of procurement decisions; (e) use of experienced

                                                                                                                       Page 20
          The World Bank
          Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


consultants for construction supervision; and (f) preparation of a detailed PIM before project effectiveness to guide
procurement implementation and contract management. The residual procurement risk after implementation of these
mitigation measures is initially assessed as Substantial.

 C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies

     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
     Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
     Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
     Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No



82.      The overall Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC) is assessed as Substantial at appraisal. Discretely,
environmental, social, and SEA/SH risks are all assessed as Substantial. These ratings reflect the project’s typology, scale,
and complexity of interventions; the MRH/DFR’s capacity and commitment; and contextual sectoral factors such as the
prevalence of OHS and occurrence of GBV. Key environmental risks and impacts are primarily construction related and
include (a) dust, noise, and vibration from road works, bridge and drainage works, and civil works related to optic cables
installation; (b) soil erosion, vegetation loss, and potential impacts on water resources; (c) generation of solid and
hazardous waste, including e-waste from digital infrastructure upgrades; (d) pollution risks from fuel storage, machinery,
and construction runoff; (e) biodiversity impacts, including potential habitat disturbance or fragmentation—particularly
where road alignments cross sensitive areas—and risks of invasive species introduction; (f) resource efficiency concerns
related to high demand for construction materials, water, and energy; and (g) GHG emissions from diesel-powered
equipment and trucks, electricity use at sites, bitumen production, and embodied carbon in construction materials.
83.      Key social risks and impacts anticipated include (a) land acquisition or restrictions on land use, with potential
physical or economic displacement, particularly affecting squatters and encroachers along feeder roads; (b) impacts on
livelihoods, especially for roadside traders dependent on right-of-way corridors; (c) minor labor influx and associated risks,
including potential disruption of local dynamics and risks of SEA/SH; (d) potential impacts on tangible cultural heritage
where project activities intersect with sites of historical or cultural significance; and (e) policy and regulatory interventions
such as on the RMTF reform that may have disproportionate adverse impacts on vulnerable groups, requiring targeted
mitigation to ensure equitable benefits and avoid harm.
84.     To manage risks and impacts identified, the MRH/DFR has prepared an ESCP outlining their commitment to
implement material mitigation measures, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to ensure meaningful consultation
throughout the project life cycle, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), and a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) which has been reviewed, cleared and disclosed36 on April 22, 2026. The ESMF has to include an annex
detailing CERC activation procedure and a positive list for investments prior to Effectiveness. The GoG has also prepared
a memorandum with estimates for compensation for displacement impacts through IDA. A SEA-SH Response Plan and
Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared, reviewed and cleared, and disclosed prior to effectiveness. During
implementation, site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and RAPs will be prepared, disclosed,
and implemented before the commencement of civil works. A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will
be prepared once the scope of the road fund reform has been fully fleshed out but before the commencement of reforms.
The MRH/DFR’s capacity to identify and manage E&S risks and impacts is nascent but developing. A capacity assessment

36
  MRH website https://mrh.gov.gh/publications/downloads/#1776710067340-895113e0-5e79 and WB website:
https://projects.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/document-detail/P513708?type=projects
                                                                                                                         Page 21
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


to determine the extent of utilization of Ghana’s national systems will be completed before effectiveness. In addition, the
project will embed in its design, targeted support for the DFI, Labor Department, EPA, and the LVD, to realize the
operationalization of the new E&S regulations, strengthen land acquisition and compensation processes, and improve
OHS oversight for effective implementation of the project. In addition, the DFR will staff the national AIT with social,
environmental, and GBV specialists, and add capacity at subnational levels and within supervision and contractor teams
as needed. Institutional-level stakeholder consultations have been completed, with ongoing engagement throughout
implementation. A project-wide and workers’ GRM will be established before related activities commence, and initial E&S
training will be completed within two months of effectiveness. The project will maintain close supervision and adaptive
management, updating instruments and the ESCP as needed to reflect changes in E&S risks and an evolving
implementation landscape.
Grievance Redress Services
85.     Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm
occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution
Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute
resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention
of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit
complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how
to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.

 V. KEY RISKS

86.     The overall risk of the project is rated as Substantial. Further details are provided below:
        Risk                             Assessment                                          Mitigation Measure
  Macroeconomic    Ghana’s macroeconomic fundamentals have                 The project will monitor macroeconomic
  (substantial)    improved materially since the 2022–23 crisis, with      developments through regular reviews of IMF
                   stronger growth, sharp disinflation, a stabilized       program performance and World Bank portfolio
                   exchange rate, rebuilt reserves, credible fiscal        supervision, with flexibility to adapt implementation
                   adjustment (primary surplus above targets) with         arrangements—including disbursement schedules
                   rule‑based anchors, and improved domestic market        and procurement sequencing—if conditions
                   conditions. However, residual risks remain, including   deteriorate. Continued dialogue with the MoF will
                   fiscal slippage, State Owned Enterprise (SOE) losses    ensure that project disbursement targets remain
                   in the energy and cocoa sectors, financial sector       realistic and aligned to the country’s macroeconomic
                   contingent liabilities, and terms-of-trade shocks.      context. The ongoing World Bank Development
                   These could translate into compressed fiscal space,     Policy Financing (DPF, P180718, P181148) series
                   reduced government co-financing capacity, and           provides an additional policy engagement channel to
                   procurement delays. Overall macroeconomic risk is       support fiscal discipline and SOE reform. Continued
                   rated Substantial, reflecting an incomplete recovery    adherence to the IMF Extended Credit Facility
                   that requires sustained policy commitment through       program, the macro-adequacy requirement of DPFs,
                   project implementation.                                 and the reinstated fiscal rules remain the primary
                                                                           systemic mitigation.




                                                                                                                            Page 22
     The World Bank
     Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


      Risk                             Assessment                                          Mitigation Measure
Technical        The project requires experience in applying analytical    The project will(a) undertake biannual missions to
Design of        approaches, including a multicriteria prioritization      support the technical team, (b) encourage monthly
Project or       framework and tools such as SPADE-PLUS for road           progress meetings and reporting to reduce turn-
Program          surface design. However, the client has                   around for issues resolutions, and (c) provide
(substantial)    demonstrated strong capacity in implementing rural        technical support through supervision consultancy
                 road projects, and the planned road fund reforms are      services to support DFR
                 expected to be manageable and not involve complex
                 or high-risk elements.
Institutional    The MRH and DFR have good track records in terms          The project will include support to the IA through
Capacity for     of coordination and technical capacity as seen from       training sessions and proper staffing of the
Implementation   TSIP which closed in June 2025. However, some gaps        implementation team. On sustainability, the project
and              were observed in their response time to issues and        will intervene through TA to enhance revenue
Sustainability   project management skills. Also, the team’s capacity      mobilization for the RMTF and strengthen road asset
(substantial)    to ensure the sustenance of the road investment           management practices to enhance maintenance.
                 through maintenance is exogenous and related to
                 the GoG’s budgetary allocation.
Fiduciary        Given that (a) the MRH has experience managing            For FM, the project will provide internal and external
(substantial)    World Bank-financed projects such as TSIP (P151026)       controls through financial audits to enhance
                 and (b) both the MRH and DFR’s assessments meet           transparency and accountability.
                 the minimum requirements per IDA policy and               For procurement, the project will (a) ensure the
                 directives on IPF, the project will rely on the MRH and   MRH with more World Bank experience provides
                 DFR’s current FM systems.                                 hand-holding to the DFR with the World Bank’s
                 Procurement risk is assessed as Substantial as per the    support, (b) ensure early engagement of the MoF for
                 capacity assessment. The assessment is because (a)        timely issuance of commitment authorization, (c)
                 the DFR, which is a proposed procuring entity, has no     urge the borrower to expedite the procurement
                 World Bank experience in procurement despite              approvals, (d) encourage the use of experienced
                 having extensive public procurement experience; (b)       consultants for construction supervision, and (e)
                 there are potential delays in obtaining the MoF           submit a detailed PIM to be prepared before project
                 commitment authorization; (c) there are lengthy           effectiveness to guide implementation.
                 bureaucratic procurement processes of the
                 Government of Ghana; and (d) there are potential
                 contract implementation challenges.




                                                                                                                            Page 23
     The World Bank
     Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


      Risk                            Assessment                                         Mitigation Measure
Environment     E&S risks are assessed as substantial due to the scale   The project will (a) ensure that recommendations
and Social      of activities, borrower capacity, and local              from ESF instruments are implemented adequately,
(substantial)   government ability to manage displacement impacts.       (b) provide technical assistance through a social
                The project also considers environmental risks to        development consultant to support the team on the
                biodiversity, ecosystem services, community health       ENS plans and activity implementation, and (c)
                and safety, and cumulative infrastructure effects,       ensure and provide capacity building to the teams.
                emphasizing strong mitigation and monitoring.            To mitigate the lack of representation from regional
                Building OHS and E&S law capacity will help              technical teams, GMACP will include regional or
                consistently manage risks, reduce delays, and            decentralized staff from the DFR to monitor progress
                improve compliance and monitoring during civil           alongside the AIT based in Accra. Building on TSIP
                works, supporting project objectives and sustainable     experience—where secondment of staff to the
                investments.                                             Project Implementation Unit strengthened capacity
                Also, under TSIP, the lack of representation from        while reducing costs—the project will leverage
                regional technical teams led to delays in addressing     existing in-house capacity for implementation,
                site-specific technical and E&S issues.                  complemented by targeted technical assistance and
                                                                         the appointment of a PC to ensure effective
                                                                         coordination between the MRH and DFR. In addition,
                                                                         a supervision consultant will be engaged to provide
                                                                         independent oversight and augment DFR’s
                                                                         supervision.




                                                                                                                         Page 24
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate

Program Development Objective Indicators

Program Development Objective(s)

To improve and sustain all-season farm-to-market road connectivity in selected districts of Ghana.


PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes


   Baseline                                                 Period 1                                                 Closing Period
   Improve and sustain all-season farm-to-market road connectivity in selected districts of Ghana
   Inferred beneficiaries of improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (Number of people) CRI
   Mar/2026                                                 Jun/2029                                                 Jun/2031
   0                                                        278,000                                                  557,000
     ➢Inferred beneficiaries of that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Mar/2026                                                 Jun/2029                                                 Jun/2031
   0                                                        140,000                                                  278,000
     ➢Inferred beneficiaries of improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Mar/2026                                                 Jun/2029                                                 Jun/2031
   0                                                        156,000                                                  312,000
   Share of feeder roads maintained under the project (Percentage)
   Mar/2026                                                 Jun/2029                                                 Jun/2031
   0                                                        30                                                       100
   Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (Number)
   Mar/2026                                                 Jun/2029                                                 Jun/2031
   0                                                        184,000                                                  368,000


Intermediate Indicators by Components


   Baseline                                                Period 1                                                Closing Period
Rehabilitation of feeder roads
Roads rehabilitated and/or ugraded with climate and road safety considerations (Kilometers)
Mar/2026                                             Jul/2029                                          Jun/2031
0                                                    850                                               1,050
  ➢of which paved (Kilometers)
Mar/2026                                             Jul/2029                                          Jun/2031
0                                                    595                                               750
  ➢of which unpaved (Kilometers)
Mar/2026                                             Jul/2026                                          Jun/2031
0                                                    255                                               300
Average reduction in vehicle travel time after road rehabilitation (Percentage)
Mar/2026                                             Jul/2029                                          Jun/2031
0                                                    20                                                35
  ➢of which paved (Percentage)
Jun/2026                                             Jul/2029                                          Jun/2031
0                                                    25                                                40
  ➢of which unpaved (Percentage)
Mar/2026                                             Jul/2029                                          Jun/2031
0                                                    15                                                30
Private capital enabled in logistics, warehouses, and markets induced by road feeder rehabilitation (Amount (USD))
Mar/2026                                             Jul/2029                                          Jun/2031
0                                                    5 million                                         10 million
Private capital enabled to finance road construction and maintenance (Amount (USD))
Mar/2026                                             Jul/2029                                          Jun/2031
0                                                    60                                                90 million
Road maintenance and support to the Road Maintenance Trust Fund reforms
Length of rehabilitated roads maintained to enhance sustainability (Kilometers)
Mar/2026                                             Jul/2029                                          Jun/2031
0                                                    50                                                1,050
  ➢of which unpaved (Kilometers)
Mar/2026                                             Jul/2029                                          Jun/2031
0                                                    15                                                300
  ➢of which paved (Kilometers)
Mar/2026                                             Jul/2029                                          Jun/2031
0                                                    35                                                750
Expanded road asset database in the WIGRAMS tool (Percentage)
Mar/2026                                             Jul/2029                                          Jun/2031
15                                                   60                                                100
International Roughness index (IR) for the bitumen-surfaced roads (m/km) (Other)
                                                                                   Jun/2031
                                                                                   3.50
Project management and implementation support
Grievances addressed within project approved timeline (Percentage)
Mar/2026                                                Jul/2029                   Jun/2031
0                                                       60                         100
Number of jobs created (Number)
Mar/2026                                                Jul/2029                   Jun/2031
0                                                       15,000                     25,000
  ➢Number of jobs for women (Number)
Mar/2026                                                Jul/2029                   Jun/2031
0                                                       4,500                      7,500
People trained and certified in efficient maintenance practices (Number)
Mar/2026                                                Jul/2029                   Jun/2031
0                                                       200                        400
  ➢Females trained and certified in efficient maintenance practices (Number)
Mar/2026                                                Jul/2029                   Jun/2031
0                                                       60                         120
Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
         The World Bank
         Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
Improve and sustain farm-to-market road connectivity in selected districts in Ghana
Number of people benefiting from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services CRI
 Inferred users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructures and services (number, gender-
disaggregated) - (corporate scorecard)
                          This indicator will measures the number of people who benefit from improved access to sustainable transport
                         infrastructures, farms, market and services within 2km of the target road. The indicator is disaggregated by
Description
                         gender (men and women), by age group (youth). Youth is considered as people betwee the ages 15 to 35
                         according to Ghana’s country approach.
Frequency                Annually.
Data source              Data from the progress report from DFR
Methodology for           Beneficiaries will be estimated using distance-based catchment area which is predefined as a 2km radius
Data Collection          around an all-season rural road(newly rehabiliated feeder roads) .
Responsibility for
                          DFR
Data Collection
Farmers with improved farm‑to‑market access due to enhanced all‑season road connectivity (Number)
                          Measures the number of farmers and agri‑value‑chain actors who benefit from the improved, reliable
Description              all‑season access to markets as a result of the rehabilitation of feeder roads under the project, enabling
                         stronger market linkages and reduced transport constraints.
Frequency                Biannually
Data source              Department of Feeder Roads (DFR) progress reports; MoFA agricultural statistics
                         The indicator will be estimated by identifying farming communities and agri‑value‑chain actors located within
Methodology for          the defined catchment area of rehabilitated feeder roads. Beneficiaries will include farmers and value‑chain
Data Collection          actors whose access to markets is improved due to reduced travel time, improved reliability, and year‑round
                         passability of the rehabilitated feeder roads.
Responsibility for
                         MoFA
Data Collection
Share of rehabilitated feeder roads maintained under the (Percentage)
                         This indicator will measure the percentage of the rehabilitated feeder road network (approx. 1,050kms) that is
Description
                         managed and maintained through PBCs. The indicator is disaggregated by surfacing type(paved and unpaved)
Frequency                Biannually
Data source              Progress reporting by maintenance contractors
Methodology for          Share of rehabilitated roads maintained (%)=Total length of rehabilitated roads that are maintained under the
Data Collection          Project /(Total road network rehabiliated under the Project)×100
Responsibility for
                          DFR
Data Collection


Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
Component 1: Feeder Road Rehabilitation
Roads rehabilitated and/or upgraded with climate and road safety considerations (Kilometers)
                       This indicator will measure the total length of roads rehabilitated and/or upgraded under the Project and
Description
                       disaggregated by surfacing type (paved and unpaved)
Frequency              Biannually.
Data source            Data from the progress report from DFR
Methodology for
                        Reports of physical progress on rehabilitated roads, aggregated by cluster and surface type.
Data Collection
Responsibility for     DFR




                                                                                                                                          Page 28
         The World Bank
         Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Data Collection
Average reduction of vehicle travel time on project roads
                         This indicator measures the average reduction in travel time along the rehabilitated as a percentage of the travel
Description              time before the civil works commenced to reflect improved road conditions, and accessibility for users. The
                         indicator is disaggregated by surface type (paved and unpaved)
Frequency                Biannually
Data source              Data from the rehabilitaiton and maintenance contractors’ progress report
                         Travel time may be estimated by sampled travel time surveys: Direct measurement along representative routes
                         (dry and rainy seasons, where feasible) at a maximum vehicle speed of 50km/hr and 40km/hr for paved and
                         unpaved surfaces respectively.
Methodology for
Data Collection
                         The indicator is calculated as:
                         Reduction in travel time (%)=((Baseline average travel time -Endline average travel time )/(Baseline average
                         travel time)) ×100
Responsibility for
                         DFR (Department of Feeder Roads)
Data Collection
Private capital enabled in logistics, warehouses, and markets induced by road feeder rehabilitation
                         This indicator mesures private investments triggered by improvements in infrastructure such as logistics,
Description
                         warehouses, markets.
Frequency                At the start, at mid-term, and after completion of works
Data source              Survey report conducted in project areas of intervention
Methodology for
                         Studies on existing private sector investments and updates during project implementation
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                         DFR (Department of Feeder Roads)
Data Collection
Private capital enabled to finance road construction and maintenance
                         This indicator measures the road contractor borrowing from commercial banks (at least 12-month maturity loan)
                         and own equity. In traditional road contracts, contractors typically finance 15–30 percent of contract value as
Description              short-term working capital, funded primarily through debt (70–90 percent) and a smaller share of internal equity
                         (10–30 percent), with no long-term equity investment in the asset. Financial statements includes the level of
                         borrowing from contractors.
Frequency                At the start, at mid-term, and after completion of works
Data source              Data from contractor’s financial reports and statements
Methodology for          DFR's compilation of financial reporting on funds mobilised by contractors from commercial banks or their
Data Collection          equivalent
Responsibility for
                         DFR (Department of Feeder Roads)
Data Collection


Component 2: Road maintenance and support to Road Maintenance Trust Fund reform
Length of rehabilitated roads maintained to enhance sustainability (Kilometers)
                       This indicator will measures the total length of rehabilitated roads that are maintained (disaggregated by surface
Description
                       type).
Frequency              Biannually.
Data source            Progress report of the maintenance contractor
Methodology for
                        DFR’s monthly reporting of the contractors progress on maintenance contracts .
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                       DFR
Data Collection
 International Roughness index (IR) for the bitumen-surfaced roads (m/km)
Description             This indicator measures will measure the surface deteriration level of some sampled bitumen surfaced roads.




                                                                                                                                              Page 29
        The World Bank
        Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Frequency            Annually.
Data source          Contractor's reporting
Methodology for
                     Use of roughometer
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                     DFR/PC
Data Collection
Expanded road asset database in the WIGRAMS tool (Percentage)

                     This indicator measures road inventory conducted on all the 94,300km of road under DFR, the DUR, and GHA
Description
                     and populated in the WIGRAMS for an efficient road lifecycle planning and management.

Frequency            Biannually.
Data source          Reports from the WIGRAMS tool by MRH
                     The indicator is calculated as the percentage of the 94,300 km national road network with complete inventory
Methodology for      records available in WIGRAMS.
Data Collection      Expanded road asset database (%)=Total length of roads with complete inventory data in WIGRAMS/(Total roo
                     d network under DFR, DUR, and GHA (94,300 km))×100
Responsibility for
                     MRH
Data Collection


Component 3: Project Management and Implementation support
Grievances addressed within projectapproved timelines (Percentage)
                    Measures the share of project‑related grievances that are either resolved at the project level or formally
Description         escalated to the appropriate authority within the agreed timelines of being received through the project’s
                    grievance redress mechanism.
Frequency           Quarterly
Data source         Project GRM registry; DFR monthly report reports
Methodology for     Grievances addressed within approved timeline (%)=Number of grievances resolved or formally escalated with
Data Collection     in the approved timeline/(Total number of grievances received during the reporting period) X 100
Responsibility for
                    Agency Implementation Unit (AIT), through the designated GRM focal person
Data Collection
Number of Jobs created (disaggregated by gender and youth)
                    This indicator measures both direct and indirect jobs created under the project and disagregated by gender,
Description
                    youth and job class (low, medium and high-skilled)
Frequency            Biannually
Data source          Data from progress report of DFR
Methodology for
                     AIT’s progress report on all job types (low, medium and high skilled) and sources under the project
Data Collection
                     disaggreation by gender and age
Responsibility for
                    DFR
Data Collection
Number of people trained and certified in efficient maintenance practices (Number) - disaggregated by gender
                    The indicator measures the number of people who participated in the road maintenance training and are
Description
                    certified; with focus on enhancing more female enrolment in the training modules
Frequency           Biannually
Data source         Enrollment and certification registry from MRH
Methodology for
                    The number of persons certificied to undertake efficient various types of road maintenance work
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                    MRH
Data Collection




                                                                                                                                    Page 30
         The World Bank
         Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


ANNEX 2: ANALYTICAL APPROACH FOR ROAD PRIORITIZATION
1.     This annex outlines the three-step analytical approach used to identify road investments that most effectively
support the GoG’s objective of reducing food inflation by improving market access for agricultural production.
Step 1: Identification of priority clusters for intervention
2.      Cluster selection was conducted using a multi-criteria framework developed with the GoG, based on indicators
including road condition, agricultural production intensity, and food insecurity (see table below). For each district, a
composite score was computed through normalization of individual indicators and application of adjustable weights. An
interactive geospatial interface allowed both the GoG and the Task Team to test alternative weighting scenarios and
observe how district rankings responded to different policy priorities.
      Figure 2.1. Custom-Built Geospatial Interface Developed to Interactively Test and Refine the Multi-criteria Framework




3.      The final weighting scheme reflects a balance between policy priorities and project leverage, giving greater
importance to variables that sit closer to the project’s mechanism of impact, while ensuring alignment with higher-level
objectives.
                               Table 2.1. District-Level Indicators Used for Ranking and Clustering

                 Variables                                                          Weights
 Road infrastructure quality: percentage    This variable is assigned to be the highest weight (40%) because it sits at the root of
 of the road network in poor condition.     the project’s causal chain. Road rehabilitation is the project’s direct instrument of
 Source: Department of Feeder Roads.        intervention, and its impact depends on transforming degraded or impassable roads
 (2026).                                    into reliable, all-season links.




                                                                                                                               Page 31
         The World Bank
         Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                  Variables                                                             Weights
 Agricultural production: volumes               This variable is weighed almost as highly (35%) because it captures the core rationale
 produced by major crops (metric tons per       of the intervention: connecting productive agricultural areas to markets. Prioritizing
 year).Source: Ministry of Food and             high-production areas also maximizes the return on investment in terms of reduced
 Agriculture. (2026).                           transport costs and lower post-harvest losses.
                                                Additional crop-level weighting reflects strategic relevance: cassava, while widely
                                                produced, is largely consumed domestically and is less affected by market access
                                                constraints or external competition. By contrast, rice and maize represent more
                                                strategic opportunities: although domestic production exists, it does not consistently
                                                reach markets, while import dependence remains high.
 Rural livelihood exposure: number of           This indicator captures the potential scale of beneficiaries and the degree of
 people living in rural areas. Source:          livelihood dependence on rural infrastructure. However, it is assigned a lower weight
 WorldPop. (2026).                              (15%) to prevent prioritization from being driven primarily by population size, rather
                                                than by factors more linked to the project’s mechanism of impact.
 Food inflation vulnerability: percentage       This indicator ensures that areas most vulnerable to food shocks receive
 of the population classified as moderately     consideration and that the intervention remains aligned with broader food security
 to severely food insecure. Source:             objectives. It is assigned the lowest weight (10%) because the project influences food
 Ministry of Food and Agriculture and           security indirectly rather than through direct food or income support.
 Ghana Statistical Services, with FAO and
 WFP. (2020).

4.      Based on the final ranking, the highest-scoring districts were grouped into geographically coherent and refined
using qualitative considerations, including the location of ongoing or planned GoG programs, to avoid duplication and
maximize synergies.
Step 2: Prioritization of critical road links
              Figure 2.2. Interactive Geospatial Tool Developed to Identify Critical Roads for Farm-to-Market Access




5.    The second phase focuses on selecting individual road segments within each selected cluster. Production areas
and markets are mapped onto the road network to identify the specific links that enable agricultural output to reach
commercial centers. These links are then assessed based on the extent to which a disruption would isolate productive



                                                                                                                                  Page 32
         The World Bank
         Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


areas and markets. This process results in the spatial identification of high-priority road links whose functionality is
essential for maintaining market access for food production.
6.      A proof of concept was initially developed using satellite-derived cropland boundary data covering Ghana.
However, final prioritization will rely on official MoFA data identifying high-output production zones for strategic crops
(particularly rice and maize).
7.      To support decision-making, a second interactive geospatial tool was developed to perform network analyses
while integrating qualitative inputs and stakeholder feedback into the prioritization process.
Step 3: Technical screening and decision
8.      The final phase of the process consists of a technical screening of the prioritized segments to answer three
successive questions:
        (a)   Is an intervention required? Each prioritized segment is reviewed to verify whether civil works are required,
              to ensure that project resources are directed toward segments with demonstrable infrastructure gaps. This
              assessment includes verification of current road condition, seasonal accessibility constraints, and
              confirmation that the segment has not recently been rehabilitated or included in ongoing works programs.
        (b)   If yes, what is the appropriate intervention? The required treatment option is identified based on surface
              type, structural condition, traffic levels, and climate vulnerability considerations. Where relevant, analytical
              tools such as SPADE-PLUS are applied to support cost-effectiveness analysis and climate resilience
              integration. The SPADE-PLUS tool uses a two-step approach- a multicriteria assessment and Cost benefit
              analysis (CBA). The criteria inform the initial decision to pave or not from weighted variables and comprise
              weighted impactful variables informing the country context, regional or local context, environmental
              conditions, specific road characteristics, and engineering considerations. The process will be consolidated by
              stakeholder engagement to ensure inclusive decision-making.
        (c)   Should the project finance this intervention? Segments are screened to confirm that they meet key
              technical and operational criteria, such as sufficient length to allow efficient contract packaging and
              geographic coherence with other selected segments to minimize supervision and mobilization costs; and
              that they do not present disproportionate environmental, social, or implementation risks.
9.      The interactive geospatial tool developed under Step 2 supports this phase by allowing segments to be assessed
in descending order of network criticality. Estimated investment costs are sequentially deducted from the available budget
envelope. Alternatively, an optimization routine may be applied to maximize connectivity impact subject to the defined
budget constraint.




                                                                                                                        Page 33
         The World Bank
         Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


ANNEX 3: ROAD MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE AND FINANCING
1.       Each of the rehabilitation contracts is planned for 24 months, and it will include a 12-years -defect liability period.
The maintenance contracts will be signed before the end of the rehabilitation contract and will commence upon
completion of sections, or all of the rehabilitation works and expiration of the related defect liability period for each of
the rehabilitation contracts. The maintenance of the feeder roads and the road fund reform support is to ensure
sustainability of the road investment. Overall, maintenance of the 1050km feeder roads is estimated to cost US$ 36 million,
of which the IDA component of US$ 13 million will finance maintenance of the 450km of rehabilitated road under Clusters
3 and 4. About US$23 million counterpart funding from sources including road fund will finance maintenance of the feeder
roads under Clusters 1 and 2 whose estimated length is 600km (see Table below for details). All the 1050km rehabilitated
roads will be maintained through a PBC which is useful to ensure continuous maintenance where type and actual quantity
of maintenance activity cannot be determined prior to signing of the maintenance contract. Four maintenance contract
types including performance-based, community based, cost-based/admeasurement and the framework approach were
assessed to determine their suitability for the project’s planned maintenance. Maintenance contracts using the PBC
approach was found to be the most applicable to the maintenance design and feasible in avoiding risk related to cost
overrun from increased cost on supervision and maintenance activities for the framework approach, potential claims,
price fluctuation, and underestimated bill of quantities for the cost-based approach and loss or lack of labor and efficiency
for the community-based approach.
                              Table 3.1: Road Rehabilitation, Maintenance, and Financing Schedule

                                                                                 Year                                        Total
                   Description                         1            2            3              4               5
                                                    2026–2027 2027–2028 2028–2029            2029–2030      2030–2031
Length of roads rehabilitated within Cluster 1 (Km)      50.00    200.00     50.00                                           300.00
Length of roads rehabilitated within Cluster 2 (Km)                 100.00        200.00                                     300.00
Length of roads rehabilitated within Cluster 3 (Km)                 100.00        150.00                                     250.00
Length of roads rehabilitated within Cluster 4 (Km)                 100.00        100.00                                     200.00
Total roads rehabilitated annually (Km)                 50.00       500.00        500.00                                    1,050.00
Cost of rehabilitation for 1,050 km (Million USD)       21.60       216.00        216.00                                     454.00
Total length of rehabilitated feeder roads
                                                                                     50.00       550.00       1,050.00 1,050.00
maintained annually (Km)
Overall annual cost of maintenance (Million USD)                                      1.00          12.00           23.00     36.00
Maintenance cost for roads within Cluster 1 – 300
                                                                                      1.00           5.00            6.00     13.00
km financed by GoG (Million USD)
Maintenance cost for road within Cluster 2 – 300
                                                                                                     2.16            6.48      9.00
km financed by GoG (Million USD)
Maintenance cost for roads within Cluster 3 – 250
                                                                                                     2.16            5.40      8.00
km financed by IDA (Million USD)
Maintenance cost roads within Cluster 4 - 200km
                                                                                                     2.16            4.32      6.00
financed by IDA (Million USD)
2.      The counterpart contribution will be ringfenced in a designated operational account established by the GoG at
DFR to safeguard funding for the maintenance contracts. The GoG’s contribution to maintenance will pay for the first set
of maintenance which is expected to commence in the third year. Disbursement of IDA funds to the rehabilitation works
on roads in clusters 3 and 4 will be tied to release of the expected maintenance funds by the GoG.



                                                                                                                               Page 34
          The World Bank
          Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                        Figure 3.1. Schedule of Rehabilitation and Maintenance
                                                                                                        Year
                                 Description                               1              2              3               4              5
                                                                       2026 - 2027    2027 - 2028    2028 - 2029     2029 - 2030    2030 -2031
Length of roads rehabiltated for Package 1 (Km)                                  50            200              50
12-month Defect liability periods (DLP) for each annual rehab
Annual maintenance for Package 1 (Km)                                                                           50            250           300
Length of roads rehabiltated for Package 2 (Km)                                                100             200
12-month Defect liability periods (DLP) for each annual rehab
Annual maintenance for Package 2 (Km)                                                                                         100           300
Length of roads rehabiltated for Package 3 (Km)                                                100             150
12-month Defect liability periods (DLP) for each annual rehab
Annual maintenance for Package 2 (Km)                                                                                         100           250
Length of roads rehabiltated for Package 3 (Km)                                                100             100
12-month Defect liability periods (DLP) for each annual rehab
Annual maintenance for Package 2 (Km)                                                                                         100           200




                                                                                                                                         Page 35
      The World Bank
      Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


ANNEX 4: PROJECT INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT




                                                                                  Page 36
          The World Bank
          Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


ANNEX 5: CLIMATE RESILIENCE OF THE ROAD INVESTMENTS
1.      Over half of the road investments will be in areas exposed to high risk of sea-level rise and coastal flooding,
while the entire project footprint lies in zones with high river flood risk.
         •     The southern regions covered by the project are especially vulnerable to coastal hazards. In particular, the
               Volta Region (entirely covered under Cluster 2) is among Ghana’s most exposed coastal areas. In November
               2021, a storm-driven ocean surge displaced nearly 4,000 residents in the Keta District37, while the 2023
               Akosombo Dam spillage inundated districts including North, Central, and South Tongu in the Volta Region as
               well as the Asuogyaman District in the Eastern Region (all covered under Cluster 2). Western and Central
               Regions (hosting roughly half of Cluster 4) also face significant coastal exposure. Approximately 170 km² in
               the Western Region and 200 km² in the Central Region are projected to be at risk from sea-level rise, placing
               tens of thousands of residents in vulnerable zones38.
         •     River flooding represents a systemic risk across the country. Districts located along the Volta River,
               particularly in the Volta Region, face elevated flood exposure even under relatively frequent 1-in-10-year
               flood events. Northern regions, including the Upper West Region, which hosts most of Cluster 1, have
               historically experienced some of the most severe river flooding in the country. The catastrophic 2007 floods,
               which affected more than 300,000 people, were concentrated in northern Ghana following extensive
               flooding of the Volta River and its tributaries39.
                               Figure 5.1. Flood Risks in Relation to Priority Clusters under the Project40




2.      Given these risks, the project places strong emphasis on enhancing climate resilience and reducing climate-
related access disruptions:
         (a)   The project’s road prioritization framework is designed to maximize resilience throughout the selection
               process. The criticality assessment in Step 2 explicitly reflects whether a road represents the sole access
               route for a given community, ensuring that the most climate-vulnerable and isolated populations are
               systematically prioritized. In Step 3, the decision to pave or not to pave incorporates an assessment of local

37 World Bank. 2022. Ghana Country Climate and Development Report. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
38 World Bank. 2010. Ghana - Making Transport Climate Resilient. Washington, DC: World Bank.
39 World Bank. 2022. Environmental and Social Systems Assessment - Ghana - PFM for Service Delivery Program - P176445. Washington, DC: World

Bank.
40 GFDRR. Think Hazard! Natural Hazard Risk Screening Tool, World Bank Group. https://thinkhazard.org.




                                                                                                                                       Page 37
 The World Bank
 Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


      climate conditions - rainfall intensity, flood exposure, and seasonal disruption patterns - with the explicit
      objective of ensuring all-season roads and eliminating climate-induced access disruptions.
(b)   Road rehabilitation and upgrading will incorporate design features aimed at improving resilience to
      climate hazards. In particular, the project will emphasize climate-resilient hydraulic structures intended to
      accommodate projected increases in rainfall intensity and runoff along the roads. Based on the climate
      vulnerabilities identified along the road sections, the project will upgrade and extend existing hydraulic
      structures where necessary, replace or install additional culverts, and substitute small pipes with larger
      culvert structures to improve water conveyance. Drainage infrastructure will also be resized to
      accommodate higher rainwater runoff, including reinforcement of both longitudinal and transverse drainage
      systems such as side drains, diverging ditches, and guard ditches. In urban crossings, gutters will be
      systematically added or upgraded to better manage concentrated runoff, while lined ditches and other
      erosion control measures will be introduced to protect road embankments. In sections that are particularly
      prone to flooding, road levels will be raised to maintain all-season accessibility. In addition, the designs will
      incorporate climate-resilient nature-based solutions, such as vegetated drainage channels, to stabilize slopes
      and enhance water infiltration. In addition, ecological design considerations will be integrated into culvert
      and drainage structures - such as mitered drains and culvert weir diversions - to enable the capture or
      redirection of runoff for beneficial community uses such as irrigation and livestock watering. Based on typical
      engineering cost structures for rural road rehabilitation projects in Sub-Saharan Africa, drainage
      infrastructure (including side drains, culverts, and cross-drainage structures) typically represents
      approximately 15 percent of total civil works costs. Applying this conservative estimate to the project’s road
      rehabilitation budget suggests that approximately US$70 million will be allocated to drainage-related
      investments that directly contribute to climate resilience.
(c)   Long-term climate resilience will also be reinforced through maintenance systems and institutional
      capacity building. The PBCs financed under component 2.1 will embed climate-smart criteria - including
      drainage maintenance standards, vegetation management to reduce erosion, and road surface condition
      thresholds linked to all-season accessibility - ensuring that contractors are directly incentivized to preserve
      the roads' resilience to extreme weather events, which are projected to intensify under climate change
      scenarios in Ghana. Under sub-component 2.2, expanded WIGRAMS data coverage to cover the feeder and
      urban road network will also lay the groundwork for integrating climate vulnerability layers, allowing future
      prioritization decisions to account for flood exposure, rainfall intensity, and other climate risk factors
      alongside traditional asset condition criteria. Finally, strengthened institutional capacity for emergency
      maintenance programming will also improve Ghana's ability to respond rapidly to climate-induced road
      damage.




                                                                                                                 Page 38
            The World Bank
            Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


ANNEX 6: LIST OF DISTRICTS BY CLUSTER
  Package                Regions Covered                                           Districts

                                                 Sissala West; Sissala East; Wa East; Sawla–Tuna–Kalba; North Gonja; Tolon;
Cluster 1      Upper West / Northern Corridor
                                                 Kumbungu

                                                 Nkwanta North; Nkwanta South; Krachi Nchumuru; Krachi East; Krachi West;
Cluster 2      Oti / Volta Corridor              Biakoye; Jasikan; Kadjebi; Hohoe; Afadzato South; Ho West; North Dayi; South
                                                 Dayi; Asuogyaman; Akatsi North; Akatsi South; Keta Municipal

               Bono, Bono East, Northern & Oti Bole; Kintampo North; Kintampo South; Atebubu–Amantin; Pru East; Sene West;
Cluster 3
               Interface                       Sene East; Techiman; Wenchi; Ejura–Sekyedumase

                                                 Dormaa West; Dormaa East; Dormaa Central; Asunafo North; Asunafo South; Bia
                                                 West; Juaboso; Bodi; Sefwi–Wiawso; Bibiani–Anhwiaso–Bekwai; Suaman; Upper
               Western / Western North / Central
Cluster 4                                        Denkyira West; Upper Denkyira East; Twifo–Atti-Morkwa; Twifo-Hemang–Lower
               Corridor
                                                 Denkyira; Wassa East; Komenda–Edina–Eguafo–Abirem; Sekondi–Takoradi;
                                                 Shama




                                                                                                                        Page 39
       The World Bank
       Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


ANNEX 7: REFERENCES
      •    AAFORD PCU. (2024). Gender Strategy. Ghana: AAFORD PCU.
      •    Aggarwal, S. (2018). Do Rural Roads Create Pathways out of Poverty? Evidence from India. Journal of
           Development Economics, 133, 375–395.Darko, E., and A. Löwe. (2016). Ghana's Construction Sector and
           Youth Employment. London: Overseas Development Institute.
      •    FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). (2017). Youth and Agriculture: Key Challenges and Concrete
           Solutions. Rome: FAO.
      •    FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). (2019). Livestock Mobility and Trade Corridors in West Africa:
           Improving Market Access and Pastoral Resilience. Rome: FAO.
      •    Government of Ghana (GoG). (2025). Road Maintenance Trust Fund Bill. Accra: Parliament of Ghana.
           https://www.parliament.gh/docs?type=Bills&OT&P=50.
      •    Herrera Dappe, M., Kunaka, C., Nash, J., & Suarez-Aleman, A. (2021). Connecting to Thrive: Challenges and
           Opportunities of Transport Integration in Eastern and Southern Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.
      •    International Labour Organization (ILO). (2017). Evaluation of Labour-Intensive Public Works Programs in
           Ghana. Geneva: International Labour Organization.
      •    International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2025. Ghana: Fifth Review under the Arrangement under the Extended
           Credit Facility, Requests for Modification of and Monetary Policy Consultation Clause and Program Extension,
           and Financing Assurances Review. IMF Country Report No. 25/343.
      •    Jacoby, H. G. (2000). Access to Markets and the Benefits of Rural Roads. Economic Journal, 110 (465), 713–
           737.
      •    Jacoby, H. G. (2009). On Measuring the Benefits of Lower Transport Costs. Journal of Development
           Economics, 89(1), 28–38.
      •    Khandker, S. R., Bakht, Z., & Koolwal, G. (2009). The Poverty Impact of Rural Roads: Evidence from
           Bangladesh. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 57(4), 685–722.
      •    Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC). (2020). Ghana Compact: Transport Project Evaluation Report.
           Washington, DC: Millennium Challenge Corporation.
      •    Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA). (2021). Agriculture Sector Progress Report. Accra: Government of
           Ghana.
      •    OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development). (2020). Global Value Chains and
           Agricultural Development: Implications for Infrastructure and Logistics. Paris: OECD.
      •    Tsiboe, F., Zereyesus, Y., Osei, E., & Amanor-Boadu, V. (2016). Market Integration and the Role of
           Transportation and Telecommunication Infrastructure in Ghana’s Agricultural Markets. Journal of
           Agricultural and Applied Economics, 48(3), 276–297.
      •    World Bank. (2010). Ghana Feeder Roads Impact Evaluation. Washington, DC: World Bank.
      •    World Bank. (2011). Transport and Agriculture: Rural Roads and Agricultural Development. Washington, DC:
           World Bank.



                                                                                                                 Page 40
The World Bank
Ghana Market Access and Connectivity Project (P513708)                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


•   World Bank. (2016). Why Transport Matters: Toward Sustainable Mobility for All. Washington, DC: World
    Bank.
•   World Bank. (2017). Implementation Completion and Results Report: Ghana Social Opportunities Project
    (GSOP). Washington, DC: World Bank.
•   World Bank. (2024). Transport Connectivity and Inclusive Growth: Global Evidence and Policy Lessons.
    Washington, DC: World Bank.
•   Jensen, H. T. (2009). General Equilibrium Analysis of Road Investments in Ghana. Washington, DC: World
    Bank.
•   World Bank. 2018. Haiti Rural Accessibility and Resilience Project (P163490). Washington, DC: World Bank.
•   World Bank. (2018). Mali Rural Mobility and Connectivity Project (P160505). Washington, DC: World Bank.
•   World Bank. (2020). Nigeria Rural Access and Agricultural Marketing Project (P163353). Washington, DC:
    World Bank.
•   World Bank. (2021). InfraSAP Database. Washington, DC: World Bank.
•   World Bank. (2023). Côte d'Ivoire Inclusive Connectivity and Rural Infrastructure Project (P178362).
    Washington, DC: World Bank.
•   MEDA. 2022. "Why MEDA Works with Rural Women."
•   Ministry of Roads and Highways (MRH). (2022). Sector Medium-Term Development Plan (SMTDP): 2022–
    2025. Accra: Government of Ghana of Ghana.
•   Ministry of Roads and Highways (MRH). (2024). Medium-Term Expenditure Framework 2024–2027. Accra:
    Government of Ghana of Ghana.
•   Ministry of Transport (MOT). (2020). National Transport Policy. Accra: Government of Ghana of Ghana.
•   Ograh, T., E. Kyeremeh, A. O. Mensah, D. Asante, and S. Brako. (2025). "Barriers to the Sale of Vegetables by
    Women SMEs: Perspective of Grounded Theory." ISAR Journal of Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences 3 (6):
    123–135.
•   Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA). Feed Ghana Programme. Accra: Government of
    Ghana. https://mofa.gov.gh/site/images/pdf/Feed_Ghana_Programme.pdf
•   Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection. (2015). National Gender Policy — Ghana. Accra:
    Government of Ghana. https://www.mogcsp.gov.gh/mdocs-posts/national-gender-policy/?mdocs-
    file=654&mdocs-url=false




                                                                                                           Page 41
