Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                      Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                     Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Mar-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01574




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                     Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                                                  Cubango-Okavango River
                                                         EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                     Basin (CORB): Financing
                          Angola, Botswana, Namibia                                 P513349
                                                         AFRICA                                                   Innovation in
                                                                                                                  Transboundary Waters
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         08-Apr-2026                07-May-2026                   Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency        GEF Focal Area
                          Permanent Okavango River       Permanent Okavango River
                          Basin Water Commission         Basin Water Commission     International Waters




_For Official Use Only_
                          (OKACOM)                       (OKACOM)

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          The Project Development Objective is to support the capitalization of the Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB) Fund
                          towards sustainable development in the Basin.

                          Components
                          Component 1. CORB Fund Capitalization
                          Component 2. CORB Fund Pipeline of Potential Investment
                          Component 3. Project Management and M&E

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 To be decided
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           To be decided

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                         10.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                              10.00

                            Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00


                                                                                                                                           Page 1



                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                           DETAILS
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                               Trust Funds                                                                                                     10.00
                                 Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                             10.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial


                           Decision




_For Official Use Only_
                           Other Decision (as needed)




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context

                          1.        The Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB) is one of the world’s most unique free-flowing rivers, crucial to the
                          sustainable development of Southern Africa. A transboundary basin with a network of river systems traversing through
                          Angola, Botswana, and Namibia, the CORB is essential to ecosystem services and to the livelihoods of more than a million
                          people. The Okavango delta has been recognized as a Wetland of International Importance (Ramsar Site) and as a UNESCO
                          World Heritage Site. The CORB covers approximately 700,000 square kilometers (Km), yet its rivers, watercourses,
                          swamps, and aquifers derive their principal flow from 120,000 square Km of sub-humid and semi-arid rangeland in the
                          Cuando Cubango Province of Angola. The Cubango- Okavango River forms the boundary of Namibia and Angola, and on
                          this stretch is joined by the main tributary, the Cuito, before flowing through the panhandle as it enters Botswana and
                          spills into the Okavango Delta. The CORB’s low human population density, numerous habitat types, and intact ecosystems
                          make it one of the most important areas for biodiversity conservation in the world. Critically, the Basin also supports job
                          opportunities and livelihoods of over a million people residing in the basin, who directly rely on its natural resources and
                          ecosystem services. The Okavango Delta is one of the largest and most pristine wetlands in the globe, with critical
                          ecosystem services that underpin the socio-economic development, livelihoods and jobs of rural and urban communities
                          within the Basin, as well as for millions of people living downstream.

                          2.    The CORB is still relatively underdeveloped, with predominantly rural communities facing limited access to
                          economic opportunities, infrastructure, and basic services. The 30-year civil war in Angola significantly hindered

                                                                                                                                                  Page 2



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


                          economic development in the upper catchment, posing challenges to local livelihoods and ecosystem sustainability.
                          Population growth is driving greater demand for natural resources, including timber harvesting, fishing and hunting, which
                          could lead to overexploitation, a decline in species and even the loss of certain species. Changes in land use, from
                          overgrazing, deforestation, conversion of land for farming and reduced streamflow, further strain the ecosystem and
                          increase the demand for water resources. Over the past 20 years, more than 200,000 hectares of forest have been lost,
                          and some 830,000 hectares of forest have been degraded due to commercial logging, land clearing by small-scale farmers,
                          and charcoal production in the basin. Deforestation affects water availability and ecosystem services across the basin, and
                          its impacts are felt through downstream river flows. Given the current trends, an additional 105,000 hectares could
                          disappear in the upper Okavango Basin over the next 30 years.1 This would seriously undermine the CORB’s ability to
                          continue providing key ecosystem services to its inhabitants, to the riparian states, and to the region.

                          3.      Water resources in the Cubango-Okavango River Basin are facing competing demands that jeopardize the
                          sustainability of jobs and livelihoods as well as ecosystems. In addition to the threats posed by poverty, rapid rural
                          population growth, commercial-scale resource harvesting, and increasing impacts of climate change, the CORB’s water
                          resources face competing demands from urbanization trends in the riparian states; resource-based livelihoods and lack of
                          alternative livelihood options; expanding tourism; commercial agriculture; and water extraction.2 The current financing in
                          the basin remains insufficient to address these challenges. The Multi-Sector Investment Opportunities Analysis (MSIOA)
                          conducted to assist decision-makers in pursuing investments in the basin to address poverty, support job creation and
                          economic growth, while preserving the unique ecology and re-enforcing cooperation, indicates that an estimated US$900




_For Official Use Only_
                          million are needed to address key investments in the basin, in addition to institutional strengthening, and the
                          establishment of a dedicated Endowment Fund.3 Addressing the impact of water resources challenges across the local and
                          the regional level is key to ensure the basin’s resilience, and requires financing innovations to achieve economies of scale
                          and scope for transboundary financing needs that cannot otherwise be accomplished at a national level.

                          4.       Improved consensus and capacity to implement cooperative water resources management solutions constitute
                          key priorities for the CORB. Angola, Botswana and Namibia have been cooperating in the management of the CORB in
                          the framework of OKACOM for over 20 years. The OKACOM agreement was recently updated (March 2025), underscoring
                          well-functioning cooperation, and the revised agreement is expected to enter into force soon. The CORB has an agreed
                          policy framework document, the Strategic Action Program (SAP), that lays down the principles for the development of the
                          basin and improvements of the livelihoods of its people through the cooperative management of the basin and its shared
                          natural resources.4 While OKACOM’s Member States demonstrated their commitment to bolster socially and
                          environmentally focused interventions in the Basin through the creation of the CORB Fund, further cooperation, including
                          with development partners and private capital providers, is needed to achieve the Fund’s mission sustainably. Coordinated
                          support both at the national and regional level is therefore critical for successful transboundary water management in the
                          CORB. This project will deepen and expand that support through the operationalization of the CORB fund, bolstering
                          innovative financing, and enhancing capacity and collaboration on transboundary water resources management in the
                          basin, which aligns with the region’s long-term goal of sustainable and equitable economic development.

                           Sectoral and Institutional Context


                          1 OKACOM, CRIDF, The Nature Conservancy. (2021). “Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB) Fund, Value Proposition: June 2021”.
                          2 World Bank. 2019. “The Cubango-Okavango River Basin Multi-Sector Investment Opportunities Analysis: Summary Report.” WB, Washington, DC.
                          3 The CORB FUND includes a Sinking fund and an Endowment fund. New financing instruments can be targeted to specific project contexts through

                          the CORB Fund, including Performance-Based grants and outcome bonds; blended finance and sustainability-linked loans, among others.
                          4 OKACOM Secretariat (2020) “Realizing the Benefits of Transboundary Water Cooperation in the Cubango-Okavango River Basin: Policy Report”,

                          Permanent Okavango River Basin Water Commission. Gaborone, Botswana.

                                                                                                                                                                    Page 3



                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


                          5.        Countries in the Cubango-Okavango River Basin recognize the need to enhance the management of water
                          resources to achieve resilient development, to protect critical natural resources and enhance livelihoods. The CORB has
                          a functioning governing body, OKACOM, established in 1994 by Angola, Botswana, and Namibia. The Commission’s
                          mandate emerges from a shared vision around anticipating and reducing unintended, unacceptable, and often
                          unnecessary impacts to the resources of the Basin that occur as a result of uncoordinated resource development and
                          utilization. To do so, it has developed a coherent approach to managing the River Basin that is based on equitable
                          allocation, sustainable utilization, sound environmental management and the sharing of benefits.5 In May 2017, OKACOM
                          commissioned a financial sustainability assessment study to identify and recommend sustainable long-term financing
                          approaches for the commission. The CORB Fund emerged as a fully independent instrument designed to enhance
                          livelihoods, ensure sustainable development of the basin’s natural resources, enhance ecosystem resilience, and provide
                          equitable benefits to the riparian states of the CORB.

                          6.       The CORB Fund is structured to address the key challenges affecting the basin, whilst catalyzing significant long-
                          term investments that promote a resilient development trajectory. The Fund aims to make investments in social and
                          environmental interventions that protect globally important biodiversity, build more resilient communities in the face of
                          climate change, and promote the kinds of livelihoods, including job opportunities, and socioeconomic development that
                          are articulated in the CORB Strategic Action Program (SAP). The Fund’s value proposition has a clear economic basis for
                          resilient development investments that blend lower-impact, ecological infrastructure investments, tourism development,




_For Official Use Only_
                          and livelihood development interventions with traditional, conventional infrastructure, to optimize delivery of the desired
                          development outcomes while safeguarding vital ecological assets. The CORB Fund aims to mobilize long-term resources
                          that will enable the countries to provide more coordinated support to local livelihoods and sustainable resource use.
                          Establishing long‑term financial solutions ensures that the CORB Fund can maintain a stable and continuous flow of
                          resources, providing consistent results that sustainably strengthen communities and their livelihoods.

                          7.      Identifying innovative financing mechanisms is crucial to ensure the long-term sustainability of the CORB Fund,
                          and to realize significant regional benefits. The CORB Fund can become a regional financial institution for cross-border
                          financing needs with strong governance and decision-making capabilities, with a centralized structure to coordinate the
                          financing of national projects that impact a region, and the capacity to raise and channel innovative climate financing
                          through one vehicle. The Fund can then achieve economies of scale and scope for transboundary basin financing needs
                          that cannot otherwise be accomplished at a national level. To unlock significant financing for the basin, the CORB Fund
                          needs to raise a sizeable equity base from the three sovereign owners and possibly third parties, such as development
                          funds and donor agencies, to enable the Fund to borrow and offer other financial services.

                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           The Project Development Objective is to support the capitalization of the CORB-Fund towards sustainable
                           development in the Cubango-Okavango river basin (CORB).

                            Key Results

                          The PDO level indicators expected by the project are:


                          5 OKACOM, CRIDF, The Nature Conservancy, 2021. “Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB) Fund, Value Proposition: 2021”.



                                                                                                                                                        Page 4



                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


                                  • Capitalization goal of US$20 million for the Endowment Fund achieved (Y/N) 6
                                  • CORB Fund Projects prepared up to pre-feasibility and/or feasibility (Number)
                                  • People benefiting from GEF-financed investments (Number) (of which women)

                               D. Project Description

                          8.      The proposed project will enable the capitalization of the CORB Fund as a conservation and development
                          finance mechanism in the CORB. In the context of the proposed Project, support to the operationalization of the CORB
                          Fund will be instrumental for the preparation of a pipeline of investments focused on the CORB Fund Pillars,7 as well as to
                          strengthen the coordination, management, and communication between all the stakeholders involved in the basin, thus
                          enhancing strategies to raise additional funding.

                          9.       Component 1. Capitalization of the CORB Fund (US$5.87 million). This component will support the capacity,
                          consolidation, and expansion of the CORB Fund as an innovative financial mechanism, and advance collaboration towards
                          its long-term sustainability. The initial target of the endowment fund’s capitalization and the expected matching capital is
                          US$20 million, to be achieved through donor support and the Riparian countries' contribution. Towards this end, the
                          project will support stakeholder coordination and engagement needed to support the Fund’s capitalization, going beyond




_For Official Use Only_
                          the traditional approach to development partners. The component will complement the funding provided to the CORB
                          Fund by other development partners (i.e., UNDP and EU), focusing on supporting the CORB Fund’s capitalization
                          implementation through (a) the establishment and rolling-out of the Fund’s governance structure, operations, and
                          systems to ensure effective functioning; (b) the implementation of stakeholder coordination to enable the CORB Fund’s
                          long-term sustainability; (c) the implementation of the CORB Fund’s communications and knowledge management; and
                          (d) the capitalization of the endowment fund through seed capital funding.

                          10.      Component 2. CORB Fund Pipeline of Potential Investment (US$3.5 million). This component will focus on the
                          development of the CORB Fund’s pipeline of investment to address the priority areas identified by Angola, Botswana and
                          Namibia in the CORB, laying the foundation for larger/more complex investments in the future. The component’s activities
                          will focus on two complementary areas of support: (a) preparing the CORB Fund Financing Roadmap as well as project
                          concepts at pre-feasibility and feasibility level for potential investment; and (b) enhancing capacity on economics of
                          biodiversity to inform investment. The development of the pipeline for potential future investment will be conducted with
                          close engagement with the Ministers of Finance of Riparian countries (as per the stakeholder engagement activities
                          reflected in Component 1), to ensure high-level buy-in and participation in the preparation of the Fund’s long-term
                          capitalization and development into the role as a regional financial institution.

                          11.    Component 3. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$0.63 million). This component will
                          support project management costs and capacity of the implementing agency, notably the CORB Fund Secretariat in
                          OKACOM (see C. Implementation Arrangements). The component will also support the establishment of project
                          management systems.



                          6
                              Through donor support and the Riparian countries' contribution.
                          7 CORB Fund Pillars: Livelihood resilience and human development; Sustainable ecosystems and biodiversity; Inclusive nature-based tourism &

                          green enterprise; and Water, agriculture and cooperative infrastructure.

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5



                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          Yes
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          Based on the current information available, the environmental and social risk rating is Moderate at concept stage and
                          will be re-assessed at Appraisal. The project is financing technical assistance aimed at (i) putting in place a financing
                          mechanism to finance activities that will be proposed under sub-component 2.1 and component 3 (ii) institutional
                          support to OKACOM and (iii) designing a livelihoods and biodiversity enhancement programs to be considered for future
                          funding. The project will not support any physical investments. Downstream activities have not yet been defined and will
                          only be known during implementation but may include provision of potable water and sanitation, sustainable fisheries
                          and agriculture, efficient cookstoves, forest management, fire control, sustainable logging and charcoal alternatives,
                          ecological restoration, reduction of sediment runoff, eco-tourism and basin wide conservation initiatives among others.




_For Official Use Only_
                          While the project supported TA activities will not have a direct impact, the potential downstream activities will be
                          implemented in a sensitive ecosystem and may have adverse environment impacts if not properly managed. Impacts
                          may include (i) loss of biodiversity and sensitive habitats, (ii) impacts on hydrology and environmental flows, (iii) water
                          pollution, (iv) introduction of alien invasives, (v) transboundary pollution, (vi) loss of access to ecosystem services,
                          potential impacts on livelihoods, and potential exclusion of vulnerable groups . Impacts are considered to be site specific
                          and can be mitigated through known mitigation measures. The implementation of activities under component 3 is
                          anticipated to enhance biodiversity conservation by addressing current impact. To manage the environmental and social
                          risks, the project will prepare a Stakeholder Engagement Plan, carry out stakeholder engagement activities, and other
                          instruments and measures to be defined in the Project’s Environmental and Social Commitment Plan, including the need
                          for an environmental and social screening of the prioritized investments to ensure the elements of the enhancement
                          program and the financing mechanism and institutional support needed to meet the requirements of the Environmental
                          and Social Framework (ESF). The Terms of Reference (TORs) for the consulting services preparing the activities under
                          Components 1 and 2 will take into account relevant Environment and Social Standards (ESS) under the ESF and will be
                          publicly disclosed. OKACOM has experience with World Bank funded projects, linked to the implementation of the
                          Regional Climate Resilience Program (RCRP) (180171). However, the institutional environmental and social risk
                          management capacity will need to be further assessed as part of project preparation, and the corresponding
                          strengthening measures defined in the project’s Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) by Appraisal.

                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          12.   The legal and institutional frameworks for cooperation exist at the basin level in the form of the 1994
                          Permanent Okavango River Basin Water Commission (OKACOM) Agreement, and the Southern African Development
                          Community Revised Protocol on Shared Watercourses of 2000. Member States signed the Revised OKACOM Agreement


                                                                                                                                                 Page 6



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


                          in March 2025, reaffirming their commitment to the SADC Protocol, as well as the objectives, functions and governance
                          of OKACOM, as a technical advisory body to the Parties on matters relating to the conservation, development and
                          utilization of water resources of common interest. Whereas the OKACOM Agreement does not create substantive rights
                          and obligations of the Parties with respect to the management of the basin, it determines the issues for which OKACOM
                          is mandated to advise the Parties. In April 2007 the three Parties established the organs of OKACOM as: (a) the
                          Commission, (b) the Okavango Basin Steering Committee (OBSC), and (c) the Secretariat. At the highest level, the CORB
                          Fund Members are responsible for the overall direction and strategic oversight of the Fund. The Board of Directors is
                          responsible for managing the business and affairs of the Fund, including overseeing and guiding the operational plans and
                          activities of the Fund (i.e., approval of projects, strategies and workplans). The Board is composed of seven non-executive
                          Directors, including three nominated by the riparian states and four independent experts selected for their technical, legal,
                          financial, or conservation expertise. The CORB governance structure ensures that all three countries are always informed
                          of the projects financed and provide their consent.

                          13.       The project will be implemented by OKACOM, which is a legal entity based in Gaborone, Botswana. Daily
                          management of the CORB Fund is handled by a Secretariat, led by an Executive Director appointed by the Board. The
                          Secretariat is responsible for implementing the Fund’s work program, managing day-to-day operations, and providing
                          administrative and technical support to the Board and its committees. The CORB Fund Secretariat will be responsible for
                          the day-to-day management of the project, under the oversight of the Project Steering Committee (PSC). The CORB Fund




_For Official Use Only_
                          Secretariat’s tasks will include general project management, procurement, financial management, environment and social
                          standards compliance, monitoring and evaluation, and reporting. While OKACOM is participating in the implementation
                          of the World Bank supported Regional Climate Resilience Program (RCRP) (180171), it doesn’t have experience as an
                          implementing agency.8 The World Bank team will provide close support for the implementation of the project, and ensure
                          adequate staff are hired within the CORB Fund Secretariat and that adequate training is provided.9 OKACOM’s role with
                          regards to the CORB Fund has been that of a process agent, chaperoning the operationalization of the CORB Fund. During
                          the first two years of the project, whilst the CORB Fund’s governance, systems, and capacity are established, OKACOM will
                          continue to provide support. Once the CORB Fund’s capacity has been established, the Funds for the Endowment Fund
                          will be transferred directly to the CORB Fund. 10

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Anders Jagerskog
                             Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

                             Diego Juan Rodriguez
                             Lead Economist



                          8 The RCRP project is implemented by the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) Secretariat.
                          9 The World Bank will work closely with OKACOM and Development Partners in the development of robust ToRs for all PIU positions, the Project

                          Steering Committee, the Development Partners Committee, the Fund Manager, and the Investment Committee.
                          10 The operationalization of the CORB Fund in terms of staffing and systems in place will be closely monitored during implementation, and is

                          reflected in the project’s intermediate indicators.

                                                                                                                                                                         Page 7



                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (P513349)


                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Permanent Okavango River Basin Water Commission (OKACOM)

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Permanent Okavango River Basin Water Commission (OKACOM)

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL




_For Official Use Only_
                          Task Team Leader(s):                  Anders Jagerskog, Diego Juan Rodriguez

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:

                          Country/Division Director:            Maryanne Sharp                           24-Mar-2026




                                                                                                                                     Page 8



                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
