Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Draft
                                     Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                                                 (SEP)
                                                  For



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                  Jammu and Kashmir Sustainable Local
                               Economic and Tourism Development Project
                                               (SLETD)
                                               P513389




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                              Appraisal
                                            November 2025




                                                                    Page | 1


                                                                        Official Use Only
Table of Contents
 1.      Introduction and Project Description ........................................................................................ 3
 2. Objective of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan ............................................................................. 3
 3. Approach and Methodology ........................................................................................................... 4
 4. Summary of Stakeholder Engagement During Project Preparation ............................................... 6
 5. Stakeholder Engagement Needs and Implementation Strategy..................................................... 7
 6. Information Disclosure .................................................................................................................. 11
 7. Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement Activities ............... 12
 8. Grievance Redress Mechanism ..................................................................................................... 14
 9. Monitoring and Reporting............................................................................................................. 17
 Annex 1: Checklist for Stakeholder Consultations on Improved Tourism in J&K ............................. 18
 Annex 2: Meetings and Consultations held with Stakeholders ........................................................ 21




                                                                                                                                    Page | 2


                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
    1. Introduction and Project Description

The World Bank will be supporting the Government of Jammu and Kashmir (JK) in implementing the
Jammu and Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic and Tourism Development Project (SLETD) (the
Project). The objective of the Project is to strengthen resilient service delivery and promote local jobs
in selected tourism destinations.

Project Description: The proposed Project directly addresses the binding constraints to sustainable
tourism development in the region. This will be done by strengthening destination planning, upgrading
infrastructure, mobilizing private capital, and embedding climate resilience into tourism systems. By
tackling these constraints in an integrated manner, it will transform selected destinations into engines
of job creation, local enterprise growth, and inclusive development.

Component 1: Strategic tourism planning and local economic development (total: US$60 million, of
which IBRD US$42 million) - This Component will identify and design tourism circuits and define the
strategic and unique role of selected destinations within the broader tourism ecosystem. It will help
create an enabling environment for private sector participation to bolster the development of selected
tourism destinations. Key strategies and analytical studies will inform investments across critical
aspects of tourism-led development. It has three subcomponents: (i) Destination planning and market
positioning; (ii) Local enterprise and investment promotion; (iii) Strengthening local service delivery
and tourism management which will include gathering of beneficiary feedback and development of
community-based tourism value chains

Component 2: Service delivery for growth and local jobs (total: US$486 million, of which IBRD US$340
million) - This Component will support interrelated investments to enhance tourist sites and improve
service delivery in host areas to ensure effective benefit-sharing. The aim is to enhance the tourist
experience while improving liveability and livelihood opportunities for local communities. It has three
subcomponents: (i) Improvement of tourist sites including signage and pathways; (ii) Integrated
services development like walkable zones address peak-season service pressures and enhance climate
resilience

Component 3: Project management (total: US$29 million, of which IBRD US$19 million) - This
Component will cover the costs of project management and implementation. This includes staff
salaries, the hiring of consultants, and training for staff and consultants in procurement, financial
management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities, as well as environmental and social
management. It will include a perception analysis of key stakeholders to better understand needs and
expectations, as well as a longitudinal study to establish a baseline and track the Project’s impact from
the tourist’s perspective.

2. Objective of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan

The objective of this Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is to identify the different stakeholders who
may impact or be impacted by the project interventions and develop strategy for engagement
throughout the project cycle. These stakeholders have been categorized into the affected parties,
other interested parties and the vulnerable and disadvantaged groups based on their impact,
influence and vulnerability to the project activities.



                                                                                                Page | 3


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
    i)   Affected Parties are those impacted or likely to be impacted directly or indirectly, positively or
         adversely by the Project
    ii) Other Interested Parties are those that may have an interest in the Project, who are not directly
         impacted, but whose interests can get affected by the Project and who can potentially
         influence the project outcomes.
    iii) Disadvantaged or Vulnerable Groups are those who are marginalised within the local
         community, and who may get disproportionately impacted or further disadvantaged by the
         Project if dedicated efforts are not made to ensure their equitable access of project benefits
         or protection from adverse impacts.

For a Project like SLETD, which seeks higher job creation, improved livelihoods and quality of life for
the tourism dependent local communities along with access to resilient public services, closer and
continuous engagement with the local community will be important, beginning with the planning
phase, for their ownership, improved project outcomes and greater development benefits. This
engagement will also be important as a risk mitigation strategy to address potential social and
resource conflicts, opposition to type or location of project interventions by ensuring meaningful
dialogue and discussion with the
stakeholders through the project
life cycle.

3.     Approach                 and
Methodology

The following approach has been
adopted for the preparation of this
SEP:
    • Detailed mapping and
        identification of potential
        stakeholders based on the
        likely project interventions;
    • Categorisation of the
        stakeholders based on their impacts, influence and vulnerability and their engagement needs
        with respect to the project;
    • Identification of the engagement tools and communication channels to be applied to ensure
        effective, continuous, culturally appropriate and meaningful dialogue with the identified
        stakeholders;
    • Assessment of the effectiveness of existing grievance mechanism/s being used by the
        implementing agencies and how it could be leveraged for developing projects GRM;
    • Development of the proposed GRM for the project (with multiple uptake channels and
        mediums, considering accessibility for various stakeholders) leveraging the state- wide
        grievance redress systems;
    • Identification of the timing and procedures for disclosure of project related information to the
        community and other relevant stakeholders;
    • Assigning role and responsibilities for implementing the SEP to the project functionaries and
        other entities, including monitoring and reporting on engagement and grievance redressal.




                                                                                                  Page | 4


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Multiple rounds of consultation meetings were held with stakeholders to understand the regional,
district and site/ destination level issues related to tourism in the project area to inform this SEP.
Participants in these meetings included heads of departments and senior functionaries of
departments and authorities, including Department of Tourism, Housing and Urban Development,
Public Works (R&B) Department, Jal-Shakti Department1, Agriculture, Horticulture, Floriculture, Forest
, Ecology, Environment and Remote Sensing, Industries and Commerce (for handicrafts and
handlooms), Power, Social Welfare, Rural Development, Panchayati Raj, Tribal Affairs apart from
District administration, Urban Local Bodies, Tourism Development Corporation, Destination level
Tourism          Development          Authorities        and        State       Housing        Board.




                                                              Shrine Boards, Federations, Associations, Unions




                            Civil Society, NGOs.
                 Local influencers, cultural icons, retired
               bureaucrats, journalists and opinion makers




a. Affected Parties

In the SLETD project the affected parties that directly impact or get impacted by the project
interventions include the project affected individuals and families residing in the project area and who
may face temporary or permanent impact due to land take, economic displacement or access related
restrictions, the local community, rural and urban self-governance institutions and their committees,
traditional and elected leaders, Women’s Self Help Groups (SHGs), Handicraft/ Handloom Co-
operatives, Producer Organisations formed around agriculture/ dairy/ forest produce, different
categories of tourists, tourism service providers (private hotels – domestic or international chains, local
lodges, restaurants – domestic or international chains, transport services) and operators, owners and
staff of business establishments offering tourism-centred services.


1 Irrigation and Flood Control part of Jal Shakti



                                                                                                                 Page | 5


                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
This category will also include those directly impacted by tourism like tourism development authorities
(TDAs), Shrine Boards Vaishno Devi, Amarnath, staff at Tourism Facilitation Centres apart from the
‘direct workers’ or experts and consultants engaged at the PMU, PMC, IAs and the ‘contracted workers’
engaged for civil works and studies and assessments during the implementation phase.

b. Other Interested Parties

The other parties interested in the project will include non-governmental organizations working in the
project area or the region on social or environmental issues, the local and regional media outlets, social
media influencers, staff of departments of housing and urban development, agriculture, industry and
forest departments, public works, public health, water resources, power, social welfare and tribal
affairs, apart from industry associations and unions.

c. Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups

The vulnerable groups in the context of the project will be the pastoral or nomadic communities that
practice transhumance and access the pastures and the routes that will be intervened in to improve
accessibility and infrastructure at the selected destinations. Other vulnerable groups are the settled
tribal communities living in and around the project areas, single women, elderly, youth-at-risk,
households below the poverty line and people with disabilities.

4. Summary of Stakeholder Engagement During Project Preparation

As part of the stakeholder consultation discussions were held with the key departments and
government agencies on the project design and the likely E& S impacts and mitigation at the regional
level in Jammu and Srinagar. This included discussions with Tourism Development Authorities,
Departments of Tourism, Housing and Urban development, Rural Development, Panchayati Raj, Social
Welfare, Tribal Affairs, Forest & Wildlife, Pollution Control & Remote Sensing, Public Works, Power,
Jal Shakti Department, Industry-MSME, Agriculture and allied to understand their current operations
around the potential destinations, the processes being adopted by them to manage emerging E&S
risks and key challenges. In addition, site level meetings were held with the District Administration
and Tourism Development in a sample of localities (Sanasar, Reasi, and Kokernag botanical gardens).
In Kokernag consultations were also held with a sample of users of the main tourism attractions (the
botanical gardens), and representatives of local cooperatives of SMEs (e.g. honey and lavender
producers). Interactions with select Private Hotel chains, handicraft entrepreneurs and international
tourists were also held in Srinagar. See Annex 2 for details.

Another round of consultations were designed to engage with different categories of demand and
supply side stakeholders to have a rounded understanding about the issues and challenges, their
experience of past projects, as well as their concerns and suggestions on the future interventions.
Annex 2 shows the consultations held with Representatives of Hotels, Crafts Producer Company,
Travel/Taxi Federation; Representatives of Srinagar Tours and Travels; Hotel Federation (Srinagar);
Operators, those offering Adventure Tourism, Artisans, Exporters, Works contractors, Consultancy
firms as well as surveys undertaken with International and Domestic Tourists. Interactions at
community level, with local governance institutions, prospective host communities, SHGs, farmers,
pastorals, civil society and more service providers (lodges, restaurants, tourist guides, transport



                                                                                                 Page | 6


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
agencies etc.) and tourists will be undertaken in the coming months of preparation as well as within
two months of project effectiveness. Based on that the SEP will be revised and finalized.


5. Stakeholder Engagement Needs and Implementation Strategy

a. Key Stakeholders and Proposed Consultation Activities

 Project Stage       Stakeholders                Consultation Activities          Remarks
 Preparation         Local       community,       Consultation for discussing      Feedback received to
 /Planning Phase     elected and traditional     the     overall      project     inform the project design
                     leaders, local bodies,      objectives and proposed          and the management
                     tourism      dependent      interventions, identify E&S      measures proposed to
                     local        businesses,    risks and impacts, assess        address the likely E&S
                     Producer                    tourist        expectations,     impacts.
                     Organisations,       line   disproportionate impacts
                     departments- mainly         on vulnerable, and seek
                     tourism,     roads      &   suggestions and feedback
                     bridges,          urban     on     mitigation    actions
                     development, public         proposed.
                     health, Jalshakti, Tour
                     Operators/       Service
                     Providers     &     their
                     associations, tourists,
                     vulnerable              &
                     marginalized groups.
  Implementation     Local community &            Consultation to discuss site    Suggestions, information
  / Construction     local bodies around          specific interventions, site,   and feedback received to
  Phase              destinations, Producer       scale and timelines of          be incorporated in the
                     Organisations, SHGs,         interventions, developing       ESIA/ESMPs, RAP, CHMP
                     tourism      dependent       E&S     profile    of    the
                                                                                  and other instruments,
                     local        businesses,     area/people, undertaking
                     concerned                    perception survey and           and for any mid-course
                     departments,                 socio-economic survey for       corrections    to    the
                     Operators & Service          SIA, seeking suggestions        implementation strategy,
                     Providers,     impacted      and feedback on the             if required.
                     landowners/        land-     different implementation
                     users, vulnerable &          milestones, inform about
                     marginalized groups.         project and site specific
                                                  GRMs.
                                                  This    engagement       will
                                                  continue throughout the
                                                  sub-project cycle for each
                                                  destination/ site.
  Post-              Local community, local      Consultation for assessing       Discussion with these
  Implementation/    bodies,        tourism      the a) perceived and actual      stakeholders to inform
  Construction       dependent businesses,       benefits to local community      the sustainability plan for
  Phase              Producer                    and service providers, b)        destinations and the
                     Organisations,    Tour
                                                 adverse impacts of tourism       overall    future     state
                     Operators/      Service
                     Providers    & their        inflow, c) reduction of          strategy on tourism.
                     associations, tourists,     barriers to operators/
                     vulnerable            &     service providers, d)
                     marginalized groups.        improved tourism
                                                 experience for consumer.




                                                                                                        Page | 7


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
b. Stakeholder Engagement Strategy

The project will ensure that principles of meaningful engagement and dialogue are adopted for its
stakeholders. This will include adopting a life-cycle approach for holding public consultations, sharing
information, creating access to grievance redress mechanism and providing proactive disclosure of
project-related information transparently in a culturally appropriate manner. In addition, it will provide
adequate opportunities for stakeholders to share their feedback, suggestions and concerns. The
project will ensure that the process of participation in these engagement activities is inclusive, all
stakeholders are informed well in advance about the project and the engagement activities and they
are encouraged to be involved in the planning and monitoring processes. During these consultations
and discussions, information about the project/ sub-project, its rationale, scope, benefits, including
potential social and environmental impacts and the mitigation measures, will be explained in detail by
the project authorities.

Based on the nature of engagement need and the targeted stakeholders, following methods will be
adopted:
   • Public Consultations and meetings, including separate meetings with the disadvantaged and
       vulnerable groups (women, women’s groups, pastoral communities, tribal communities,
       youth-at-risk), at convenient time and accessible locations, especially for women and the
       marginalized,
   • Focus Group Discussions,
   • Perception and Experience Surveys, socio-economic census of the project affected parties.
   • Orientation and consultation meetings,
   • Training workshops and awareness programmes,
   • Use of social, electronic and print media for information disclosure, including websites and
       portals,
   • Government orders and public notifications,
   • Specific Information, Education, Communication (IEC) material developed by the project like
       pamphlets, brochures, posters, flyers or reels in comprehendible language/ dialect- Dogri in
       Jammu region and Kashmiri/ Koshur in Kashmir region (script is Hindi and Urdu) or local
       dialects depending upon the location
   • Disclosure of E&S instruments like ESMF, ESMP, RPF at relevant offices and on
       Department/project/ local body website,
   • Grievance redress mechanism through its various channels- physical petitions, website, toll-
       free number/ helpline, site level complaint boxes/ registers, mobile based sms/app service.

  Information to be   Target stakeholders        Tools of engagement &        Frequency                 Responsibility
       disclosed                                 mode of disclosure
 1. Details about     Elected leaders of local   Formal orientation and       Multiple rounds            PMU,
 the Project          bodies, key industry       consultation meetings and    during the                 Tourism
 purpose, key         and service                workshops, dissemination     preparation and early      Department
 activities &         associations, relevant     of Project IEC material,     implementation             and TDA/ TO
 implementation       government                 FGDs, project website and    phase
 strategy             departments/               print and electronic media
                      authorities, Producer      bulletins and social media
                      Organisations,
                      Cooperatives.
 2. Role of local     Local community,           Public consultations and     Site-specific multiple    PMU, Tourism
 communities in       elected and traditional    meetings, FGDs,              rounds during the         Department


                                                                                                       Page | 8


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
destination level     leaders, local bodies,     awareness programmes,        early implementation       and Design &
tourism planning      tourism dependent          dedicated consultations      phase                      Supervison
and accruing          local businesses,          with vulnerable groups,                                 (D&S)
benefits of           Producer Organisations,    perception survey,                                      Consultant
improved tourism      SHGs, Cooperatives,        discussion and disclosure                               with support
quality               pastoral communities       of E&S instruments,                                     from IAs and
                                                 including details of GRM                                TDAs/TOs
                                                 and its access.
3. Participation in   Local community,           Public consultations and     Early implementation       PMU, Tourism
local destination     elected and traditional    meetings, FGDs, including    phase during               Department
planning              leaders, local bodies,     dedicated consultations      destination/ site          and
                      tourism dependent          with vulnerable groups,      specific planning          Implementing
                      local businesses,          trainings on participatory                              Agencies,
                      Producer Organisations,    planning for local bodies                               TDA/TO,
                      SHGs, Cooperatives,        and TDAs
                      pastoral communities
4. Opportunities      Tourism dependent          Separate FGDs with each      Implementation             Concerned IAs
for local             local businesses/          category of stakeholders     Phase                      with support
institutions and      families, Producer         for assessment of skills,                               from PMU,
businesses to         Organisations, SHGs,       skills gap and project                                  TDA/ TOs
participate and       Cooperatives, pastoral     support, training
benefit               communities, artisans,     workshops
                      farmers
5. Discussion on      Elected leaders of local   Public consultations to      Planning phase for         PMU, Tourism
E&S risks,            bodies, key industry       inform preparation of        framework                  Department
community level       and service associations   documents and for            documents and              with support
precautions and                                  discussion on draft          implementation             from IAs and
mitigation                                       instruments, Disclosure      phase for site specific    TDAs
measures                                         on Project/ Department       management / action
                                                 and local body website,      plans
                                                 public awareness about
                                                 project GRM channels and
                                                 means of access
6. Conflict           Local community,           Public consultations and     Implementation             PMU, Tourism
management with       elected and traditional    FGDs, Discission and         Phase                      Department
respect to            leaders, local bodies      disclosure of E&S            Need based                 and concerned
resources and         and members of             documents describing                                    IAs
resource access       disadvantaged and          resolution mechanisms
                      marginalized
                      communities
7. Resettlement       Local community,           Public consultations,        Implementation             PMU, Tourism
impacts &             especially those           FGDs, including dedicated    phase, well before         with support
proposed              affected by land take,     consultations with project   physical interventions     from local
mitigation            economic displacement      affected and vulnerable;     are initiated as per       bodies and
measures              or access restrictions,    socio-economic survey for    national law               TDA/TOs
                      members of the             developing SIA/ RAP,
                      vulnerable and             government notifications
                      marginalized               and orders, disclosure and
                      communities                discussion on draft SIA/
                                                 RAP
8. GBV related        Direct workers engaged     Awareness and                Implementation             PMU, Tourism,
provisions            in the PMU and IAs,        sensitization workshops      Phase                      PMC and IAs
                      contracted workers         on key legal provisions,     Periodic
                      engaged by contractors     organizational
                                                 requirements, refresher
                                                 trainings, dissemination


                                                                                                        Page | 9


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                                 and familiarization with
                                                 Worker’s code of conduct,
                                                 Contractor obligations in
                                                 bid documents
 9. Grievance          Local communities,        Awareness and IEC about          Implementation      PMU, Tourism,
 Redress               artisans, farmers,        different GRM channels,          Phase               PMC and IAs
 Mechanisms under      members of producer       site level display boards,       Periodic
 the project           organizations, SHGs,      complaint boxes/
                       Cooperatives, Tourism     registers, project and local
                       dependent local           body website
                       businesses/ families,
                       pastoral communities,
                       direct and contracted
                       workers
 10. Labor             PMU and IA staff,         Awareness on provisions          Implementation      Concerned IAs
 Management            Contractors, Contracted   and requirements under           Phase               to enforce
 Procedures and        Workers                   LMP, Orientation training                            with support
 Workers Code of                                 on Workers Code of                                   from D&S
 Conduct                                         Conduct, Bid documents                               Consultant;
                                                                                                      PMU, Tourism
                                                                                                      to oversee
 11. Cultural          Local communities and     Awareness on specific            Implementation       PMU Tourism
 Heritage              Tourists                  cultural sites, their historic   Phase               Department,
 Management                                      significance, responsible                            PMC
                                                 behavior for preservation
 12. Tourism           Prospective Tourists      Awareness, services, Dos         Implementation       PMU Tourism,
 destinations,                                   and Don’ts, information          Phase               JKTDCL, TDA/
 services available,                             for any emergencies                                  TOs
 booking
 information

All such engagement activities under the project will need to be duly documented by the project
authorities and implementing agencies and summarized for including the periodic progress reports
submitted to the World Bank. These summaries will capture the following: date and location of the
engagement activity, number and profile of participants, form of engagement, key topics/ issues
discussed, key concerns raised, and suggestions made by the stakeholder group, how they were
addressed or responded to and any follow- up action required on the discussions/ consultations held.
The Social Development Expert at the PMU will be responsible for ensuring that this information is
collected and collated from all sub-project sites, reported periodically and necessarily follow up actions
are taken.


The proposed Emerging Destinations also have Tourism Facilitation and Development Centre at
select locations which play a series of functions: reception for tourists, information dissemination,
visitor guidance, data on tourist footfall, lodging services or other services like Cafeteria, Health
Club, Adventure activities, Amenities (toilets, rest sheds, parking facilities), Coordination with
departments etc. The 8 to 10 Staff deployed includes Assistant Tourist Officer and Multi-Tasking
Staff to support tourists, and the department. As a part of this project, the role and functionality
of these centres would be assessed and expanded/streamlined to improve interface between
tourists and service providers.




                                                                                                   Page | 10


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
6. Information Disclosure

All relevant SLETD related information shall be disclosed either through public consultation and
meetings or by making this information available on the project- department- local body website and
by physically placing them at venues and locations frequented by the stakeholders, like the project site
office, municipal or panchayat offices and the district administration in easily understandable format
and in the local language. Such information will be made available as early as possible to allow the
stakeholders, especially those belonging to the community to clearly understand the risks and impacts
and the measure proposed to minimize or avoid those impacts.

The PMU and the line departments working on infrastructure improvement/ expansion and
livelihoods/ skill development activities shall provide all relevant information related to E&S risk
management and opportunities for benefiting from the project interventions to the local community,
including producers, artisans, local businesses in a timely manner, and at an accessible place, for them
to have sufficient time to respond or take advantage of the project related opportunities.

The latest, updated versions of the ESMF and RPF will be disclosed at the project website, providing
opportunity for civil society organisations and other interested parties to raise objections or seek
clarifications. Subsequent changes made to these documents during the implementation phase will
need to be reflected in the disclosed versions. The executive summaries of the key documents,
including the ESMF, RPF, and the full RAP with its entitlement matrix, shall be translated and made
available to stakeholders on demand. These translated versions of documents will also be placed on
the website. Any changes or recommendations received on these documents will be considered by the
department and the PMU and if found pertinent, will be incorporated in the project documents.
Written responses will be provided to all the stakeholders submitting suggestions and clarifications,
either through the project GRM or outside it.

Following documents shall be made available at the regional offices of Tourism Department and the
JKTDCL, district administration and on the project/ department website.
    a. Executive Summary of the project ESMF and RPF (English, Hindi, Urdu)
    b. Final and completed ESMF Report and subsequent updated/amended versions, if applicable
        (in English)
    c. Site specific Resettlement Action Plans, along with their entitlement matrix (English, Hindi,
        Urdu)
    d. All destination specific ESIAs along with their ESMPs (English)
    e. Annual ESHS Monitoring Reports (English)

English versions of the following documents will be formally submitted by SLETD to the World Bank
for disclosure on the Bank’s website:
    a. Draft ESMF, Final ESMF, and any subsequent amended versions of ESMF
    b. Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
    c. Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
    d. Site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
    e. All site specific, sub-project level ESIAs along with their ESMPs
    f. ESHS monitoring reports



                                                                                              Page | 11


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
7. Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement Activities

PMU directly and through the Project Management Consultant (PMC) will ensure that the necessary
staff and budget to implement the Stakeholder Engagement activities are made available. PMU
established during preparation phase, which will be supported by E&S risk management staff -
environmental experts, forest expert, social development and resettlement expert, and a land
collector will be responsible for implementation and monitoring of the environmental and social risk
management activities, including the implementation of the SEP and the project grievance redressal
systems.

The stakeholder engagement activities will be integrated in the project work-plan with the PMU E&S
Managers ensuring that the SEP activities have resources available and implemented as per the
outlined timelines. They will also be responsible for documentation and periodic reporting on the
stakeholder engagement activities.

The key roles and responsibilities related to stakeholder engagement activities and their monitoring
will lie with the PMU, Tourism Department with support being provided by the PMC and the E&S staff
designated by Implementing Agencies (IAs) or those with the D&S Consultants. The following are the
roles of the responsible agencies and officials with respect to the implementing the SEP and the project
GRM.




                                                                                              Page | 12


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
 Responsibility     Responsibilities for SEP and GRM implementation
 Project Director   • Responsible for overall project management including the review and monitoring of
                        SEP implementation
                    • Head of State level Grievance Redressal Committee for the project. Supervising the
                        reporting of activities to the World Bank
 PMU                • Provide guidance to IAs, local bodies, implementing agencies and contractors on
 (supported by          activities planned under this SEP
 PMC) – E&S         • Train them on the different GRMs available under the project and process of
 Supervisors            managing and reporting progress on the GRM
                    • Address unresolved grievances escalated to the PMU in a timely manner
                    • Ensure implementation of activities as per the workplans by different agencies and
                        availability of resources for those activities
                    • Periodically undertake a comprehensive review of the project GRM to assess its
                        uptake and profile of aggrieved accessing it
                    • Ensure that contractor responsibilities regarding awareness on workers GRM and
                        Code of Conduct are incorporated in the bids floated by PMU
                    • Develop ToRs for commissioning Perception and Experience Surveys and ensure their
                        timely implementation
                    • Ensure that all planned engagement activities, including IEC are culturally appropriate
                        and in an understandable language/ dialect.
                    • Ensure regular dissemination of project-related information to stakeholders using
                        social and electronic media
                    • Organise training of IAs and others on different aspects of SEP, including on
                        participatory planning, conduct of FGDs,
                    • Overall coordination, management and monitoring of SE activities in the sub-projects/
                        destinations
 Implementing       • Provide guidance and support to implementing agencies and contractors on SE
 Agencies and           activities to be implemented by them
 E&S Specialists    • Ensure adequate information about SE activities and the project to the local
 of Design and          communities. Implement SE activities for which they are directly responsible
 Implementation     • Regularly monitor the quality of SE activities being undertaken and provide guidance
 Consultant             for improvement
 team               • Address unresolved grievances escalated to the IA in a timely manner
                    • Collect data on SE activities undertaken and grievance handled for periodically
                        reporting to the PMU
                    • Liaise with local administration for effective functioning of the GRM



Budget for Stakeholder Engagement Activities

                                                    Unit Cost     Total Cost             Remarks
              Activity                 Number
                                                      (Rs.)         (Rs.)
                                                     10,000       28,00,000     Once a quarter for 7 years
 Stakeholder Consultations               280                                       (4 times a year for 10
                                                                                        destinations)
                                                     25,000       15,00,000     2 per destination/ site per
 Trainings & Workshops                    60                                      year for 3 years (for 10
                                                                                        destinations)
 Setting up of GRM (collecting &                        -         12,00,000        Lumpsum for 7 years
 maintaining grievance related             -
 database)
 Awareness and IEC Material               -            -          10,00,000        Lumpsum for 7 years
 Stakeholder Perception Survey            1        10,00,000      10,00,000              Once

                                                                                                   Page | 13


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                                           7,50,000        15,00,000       Once in Year 1 and in Year
 Tourist Experience Surveys                      2
                                                                                           4/5
                 TOTAL                                                    90,000,000



8. Grievance Redress Mechanism

    a. Current system
The state has several systems that provide citizens with a platform for filing grievances against public
services and functionaries. These include the online portal - JK Samadhan2, the CM’s Public Services &
Outreach Office3 as well as stand alone systems developed for on-going projects like Jhelum and Tawi
Flood Recovery Project. Given the nature of SLETD, the need for interface with diverse stakeholders,
and requirement of customized responses, and value addition of feedback for design and
implementation, a dedicated GRM is being proposed. It will be ensured that the grievance redressal
procedures are responsive, understandable and adopt a robust and transparent process that is
culturally appropriate, timely and accessible to all stakeholders without any retribution. This GRM will
have the following features:
    • Fair transparent and accessible grievance settlement mechanism
    • Gender responsive and accessible to all free of cost,
    • Culturally appropriate, offering acceptable redressal actions aimed at the satisfactory
         redressal for the aggrieved,
    • Multiple avenues and channels- physical and digital- for registering their complaints or
         resolving dispute that may arise directly or indirectly due to the project activities,
    • Encouragement of customary conflict and dispute resolution systems as far as possible, for
         resolving local grievances
    • Assurance that access to judicial and administrative recourse, in case the complainant is
         unsatisfied with the project level resolution.

      b. Proposed System
      b1. PROJECT LEVEL GRM
Stakeholders would be able to submit their grievances both offline and online through various
channels like:
    i.    Web-based on Project/ Department website or Portal,
   ii.    Telephonic helpline/ toll-free numbers,
  iii.    In-person verbal or written applications/ petitions to project authorities/ contractors/ elected
          leaders,
  iv.     Complaint boxes/ registers at site.

All grievances will be consolidated, recorded and tracked using the project’s Management Information
System (MIS). Grievances received at different levels- destination, local body, district or state will be
recorded and directed to the concerned official, citing the timelines for redressal based on the nature


2 between the period July to November 2024, about 28,974 grievances were received, of which 19239 were resolved.
3 was established in December 2024 serves as a single-window interface for citizens. It has two wings: Grievance Redressal

Wing (Raabita): Focused on resolving grievances effectively and Public Outreach and Evaluation cum Feedback Wing:
Dedicated to public engagement and feedback collection. It adopts a hybrid communication model: Online Platforms (a
centralized portal for grievance registration, tracking, and resolution); phone helpline providing operational, providing
immediate assistance; Offline Platforms, grievance redressal sessions are held at the office.

                                                                                                                  Page | 14


                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
of complaint. All offline complaints will be immediately digitised and dispatched to the concerned
office/ official. There will be:
    i.   An internal auto-escalation mechanism,
   ii.   Defined redressal timelines,
  iii.   alerts for generation pending/ unresolved grievances,
  iv.    response and closure protocols will be developed as part of this GRM.

Each complainant will be assigned a unique complaint number which will be communicated to the
complainant for future reference and follow-up action. If no response is not received as per the defined
timelines, the complaint will be escalated to the higher level.

        b2. DESTINATION AND SITE LEVEL GRM
Grievances related to the project activities from the local community, workers and other interested
parties will largely be addressed by the destination level GRM.
   i.   A local Grievance redressal committee (GRC) comprising representatives from the community,
        civil society, local body and implementing agencies will be constituted to handle such
        grievances.
  ii.   The GRC will have a minimum of 9 members and will have at least 30 percent representation
        by women members, with local Tourism Officer (TO) or Tourism Development Authority (TDA)
        represented in the GRC. The GRC should ideally be representative of various cohorts and
        interest groups in and around the destination to ensure fair representation.
 iii.   In case of intra- community conflicts, the GRC will try to ensure that the traditional dispute
        resolution mechanisms are used to the extent possible, before they are formally submitted for
        resolution by the project.
 iv.    The destination level GRC will meet at least once every quarter, or earlier if required, to review
        the status of grievance redressal, redress complaints requiring urgent attention and to issue
        instructions to the implementing agencies and contractors.
  v.    The GRC will ensure that all worksites have boards mentioning the name and mobile numbers
        of the grievance officer designated for that site.
 vi.    The coordination with Tourism Resource Centres will also be developed as a part of the
        Destination and Site level GRM

      b3. DISTRICT LEVEL GRM
At the district level, the implementing department/PIU will:
    i.    collect off-line grievances
   ii.    undertake a preliminary assessment on the relevance of grievances
  iii.    digitize offline grievances
  iv.     categorize them based on the nature of complaints
   v.     route them to concerned duty- bearers
  vi.     update the complainants about status of their grievance
A senior district level functionary will be designated as the Grievance Redressal Officer (GRO)
responsible for coordinating and managing resolution of all the grievances received in the district from
different destinations/ sites taken up under STLED. The GRO will:
      • Submit monthly and quarterly reports on status of grievance handled to the PMU in an agreed
          format.
      • Undertake periodic review and monitoring visits to the worksites/ destinations to assess the
          effectiveness of the GRM and suggest improvements



                                                                                               Page | 15


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
    •   Reviewing the meeting minutes of the site level GRCs and the site level complaint registers/
        boxes.
    •   Designate one frontline staff from the department/Implementing Agency (IA) to ensure that
        the complaint boxes are opened in their presence and all offline grievances received at the
        destination are digitized and entered in the system within 24- 48 hours of their receipt.


     b4. STATE OR PROJECT LEVEL GRM
A State level GRC will be constituted under the Project Director (PD) or a nominee at the PMU for
reviewing the functioning of the GRM on a six-monthly basis. The GRC will have the Social
Development Specialist at the PMU as the convenor and will have representation from the PMU, IAs
and the key implementing agencies. The State level GRC will:
    i.    redress all pending, unresolved and escalated grievances
   ii.    periodically undertake a comprehensive review of the status of project GRM
  iii.    suggest improvements or changes in the GRM based on this review to make the mechanism
          more accessible and to increase its uptake by the stakeholders.
  iv.     take steps to improve overall awareness about the project GRM
   v.     allocate funds to the district and destinations to improve awareness about the project and its
          GRM.

The PMU will have in- house or third party managed call centre/ helpline to receive grievances of the
stakeholders, including the tourists visiting the destinations. Upscaling this IVRS based helpline/ call
centre to the entire state or limiting it to the project areas will be the decision taken by the State GRC
or the State Steering Committee headed by the Chief Secretary.

    c. Proposed Timelines and Escalation

✓ All grievances received by the project will need to be acknowledged and a unique complaint ID
  generated and shared with the complainant (within 1-2 working days for online and within 3-5
  working days for offline)
✓ Non-project related grievances will need to be responded to within one week of its filing
✓ Project related grievances will need to be directed to the concerned office/officer within 2 days
✓ Resolution or response to be provided within one week.

Grievances of complicated nature, requiring field level investigation or coordination with other
agencies will need to be resolved within 2 weeks, with intimation to the complainant about the
extended timeline by the end of one week. All complaints unresolved or un-responded will be
escalated to the higher level at the end of the first week, with the higher level having one week to
resolve or respond to the grievance. All unresolved grievances will come to the State GRC for redressal.


    d. For SEA/ SH Related Grievances

All Implementing Agencies and the PMU to have functional Internal Complaints Committee (ICC) for
addressing any SEA/SH-related complaints at the workplace. The committee will be constituted as per
the requirements of the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and
Redressal) Act, 2013.


                                                                                               Page | 16


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
The PMU will put in place necessary mechanisms and procedures for confidential reporting with safe
and ethical documentation of SEA/SH issues at the project level. All employers, including contractors,
as per the Act must ensure that the contact information of ICC is displayed in their respective offices
and that regular trainings/orientation programs are organised for project staff and the contractual
workers.

The PMU will:
    i. identify and train GBV focal points within the GRM, who will be responsible for GBV/SEA-SH
       cases and referrals as defined in the referral pathway.
   ii. Ensure SEA/SH related processes are overseen by the Social Development Specialist at the
       PMU
  iii. Ensure orientation of the E&S specialists and/ or E&S focal points at IAs and or Design
       Consulting Firms
  iv.  Map GBV service provider/s nearest to the destinations
   v.  Communicate SEA/SH referral pathways to GBV service providers to all project workers
  vi.  Follow a survivor-centric approach when responding to a SEA/SH complaint.
 vii.  Support survivors and aggrieved persons to register their complaints with existing channels
       such as Women Helpline (181), Emergency Helpline (112), LG Helpline, One Stop Centres or
       with designated NGOs.
viii.  Organise orientation and refresher trainings for District level GROs, select destination-level
       GRC members on handling anonymous grievances received from workers or GBV victims.

9. Monitoring and Reporting

The overall responsibility for the implementation of the SEP will lie with the PMU with Social
Development Specialist as the focal point. Support for monitoring and periodic data collection on
grievances being provided by the E&S specialists at the PMC and IAs.
    i.  The Stakeholder Engagement Plan will be periodically revised and updated as necessary during
        implementation to ensure that the information presented is relevant.
   ii.  The PMU will also ensure that the identified methods of engagement remain appropriate and
        effective in line with the project context and specific phases of the project-cycle.
  iii.  Any major changes to the project-related activities and their schedule will be duly reflected in
        the SEP.
  iv.   To implement the SEP, annual plans and budgets will be allocated for stakeholder engagement
        related activities, based on the budget provided.
Monthly summaries and internal reports on public grievances, inquiries, and related incidents,
together with the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventative actions will be
collated by the IAs and submitted to the PMU. The monthly summaries will provide a mechanism for
tracking the status of complaints so that they are addressed in a timely and effective manner.

Information on public engagement activities undertaken by the Project during the year will also be
monitored and reported in quarterly ESHS reports submitted to the World Bank. SEP monitoring will
be integrated in the overall project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements.




                                                                                              Page | 17


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
Annex 1: Checklist for Stakeholder Consultations on Improved Tourism in J&K

A. Consultations to be organized
 Category                 Stakeholder
 Public Agencies/         Destination level consultation with different government agencies
 Administration           Tourism Development Authorities
                          District Administration
 Community and Local      Destination level consultation with elected leaders/ traditional
 governance Institutions leaders/District Development Councils
 Service Providers        Consultation with Tourism Service Providers- tour operators/ hotel-
                          restaurant owners/ taxi operators/ guides
                          Federations/Associations/ Unions
 Producer Organizations Consultation with Handicraft or Handloom cooperatives, Farmer producer
 and Collectives          groups and SHGs (linked to tourism)
 Consumers- Tourists      Consultation with Tourists (try to include a diverse group – religious/
                          adventure/ nature, those interested in heritage/ culture/ arts, domestic,
                          foreigners)

B. Guidance for Facilitators:
• Organize minimum one consultation per category in each division and ensure diverse
    representation
• All consultations need to begin with sharing that the Department of Tourism is mapping
    experiences, feedback and suggestions of various stakeholders in the Tourism Sector. The idea is
    that for any new investments should be sensitive towards the concerns of the service providers
    and users to make the sector more organized. There may be investments to expand and improve
    public utilities and services related to water supply, sanitation, accessibility and connectivity to
    accommodate increased inflow of tourists to various destinations.
• Please take photographs of the consultation, document discussions and participants details.
    Output of each consultation should be a 1-2 page summary of the feedback received from
    stakeholders.
• No large gatherings, only one-on-one or small group interactions (max 8 people)
• A checklist is provided to help guide the consultations

C. Guiding questions for Consultation
   1. Government Agencies
   1.1 What are the works undertaken by your agency that contribute to tourism promotion in the
       region?
   1.2 What has been their impact and learnings for future?
   1.3 What according to you are the tourism related challenges of the region or destination?
   1.4 What could be done to address those gaps and challenges?
   2. Guiding questions for Consultation with Local Community and Elected Representatives4
   2.1 What are the main types of tourists who visit your area?

4 Community living in the panchayats and municipal bodies that are part of any tourist destination and leaders that were part

of the last local body, district level committees as well as traditional leaders. Please ensure fair participation of women in
these consultations- at least 30 percent. If possible, undertake one consultation with the nomadic communities in Jammu
region, to assess the challenges faced by them due to increased tourism and other difficulties faced during their seasonal
migration and their suggestions on how these could be addressed. Please ensure representation from those directly
dependent on tourism, farmers/ landowners, youth, women, poor households, homestay owners (if available) to capture
diversity.

                                                                                                                  Page | 18


                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
2.2 What has been the change due to tourism in the last five years?
2.3 What have been the benefits of tourism to the community and the village/ town?
2.4 What have been the challenges faced by the community and the village/ town due to tourism?
2.5 Are there any specific examples where tourist influx has adversely impacted on the local
    community or the environment?
2.6 Which sections of the community (e.g., youth, women, artisans, tribal groups) have benefited
    most/least from tourism so far? Why?
2.7 Are there any traditional livelihoods or natural resources that have been affected due to
    tourism or construction?
2.8 Are there public services (e.g., water, roads, waste disposal, electricity) that are strained due
    to increased tourism activity?
2.9 How can we ensure tourism protects the environment and respects local culture?
2.10         What could be done to better organize tourism in )your area and maximize economic
    benefits to the local community?
2.11         Are there any local customs, sacred sites, or areas that you feel should be protected
    or kept undisturbed from tourism activity?
2.12         Do you think the community has a say in decisions related to tourism planning or
    infrastructure development? If not, how should this be improved?
2.13         What support (training, infrastructure, financing) would help the local community
    participate more in tourism-related activities?
2.14         How could local grievances or complaints related to tourism/tourists be handled more
    effectively?

3. Guiding questions for Consultation with Tourism Service providers
3.1 According to you, what has been the trend of tourism in the region that you operate in- in
    terms of
    - tourist numbers
    - type of tourism
    - duration
    - seasonality
3.2 What are the main types of services you provide?
3.3 What are the challenges that you face in your tourism-related work (e.g., operational,
    financial, regulatory)?
3.4 What kind of support do you get from the local administration and other government
    agencies?
3.5 What additional support from government agencies will help in better tourism promotion as
    well as better business for you?
3.6 What more could the UT do better promote, regulate and organize tourism in J&K?
3.7 What infrastructure gaps—such as roads, signage, sanitation, or parking—do you think are
    holding back tourism growth in your area?
3.8 Are there any environmental or social concerns you have witnessed due to tourism in your
    area (e.g., unmanaged waste, crowding, conflict with locals, water shortage)?
3.9 Have you or your staff received any formal training in hospitality, sustainability, digital
    promotion, or visitor safety? If not, what kind of training would you find useful?
3.10         Do you have any community-based tourism models—such as homestays, guided
    nature walks, or cultural events in your area? Please share examples.
3.11         Would you be interested in collaborating with the community for tourism?


                                                                                           Page | 19


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
3.12        What specific steps can be taken to improve the tourist experience while also
    preserving the cultural and natural character of your destination?

4. Guiding questions for Consultation with Cooperative Members/FPOs/SHGs
4.1 What kind of craft/s are the cooperative members engaged in?
4.2 What kind of support is available to members from the cooperative and government agencies?
4.3 What are the challenges faced in production and sales by members?
4.4 Are members able to display and sell their products to local tourists at the destination?
4.5 What more could be done to improve awareness about handicraft/handloom products and
    their sales?

5. Guiding questions for Consultation with Tourists
5.1 What factors influenced your decision to visit this destination?
5.2 What were your primary expectations about the quality of destination, its access, stay-
    experience, value for money? Were they met or not? Reasons for it.
5.3 What are the areas in which there is scope for improvements in this destination?
5.4 Can you cite one example from your domestic tourism experience that you consider to be a
    perfect holiday/stay? What aspects impressed you?
5.5 What were the challenges?
5.6 What are your suggestions for improvement? Do you know of any tourism helpline or centre?
    Would it be helpful to have one in addressing the grievances of tourists?




                                                                                    Page | 20


                                                                                          Official Use Only
Annex 2: Meetings and Consultations held with Stakeholders

  Date of      Venue                Number of     Profile/ Organization of          Key Points/Issues Discussed
  meeting                          participants   Participants
  10.07.2025   2 Botanical          10            Civil society/beneficiaries       • High recreational value to the users of the Botanical Garden and its facilities
               Gardens,                           Female university students,       • Persian garden with high historic and educational value for local communities
               Kokernag                           children and other                  and visitors
               (Kashmir)                          visitors/users of the Botanical   • Most popular Botanical Garden perceived as a safe place for families, women
                                                  Garden                              and children to spend time outdoor and socialize during spare time
                                                                                    • Need to improve visitors facilities, like convenience facilities, lighting, sitting
                                                                                      areas, access to water bodies
                                                                                    • Cleanliness of the gardens required both improved Solid Waste Management
                                                                                      and hygiene public awareness
  10.07.2025   TDA facility at      12            Representatives of local SMEs     • Innovation in production methods and types of herbs, packaging for e-
               Botanical                          and local cooperatives of           commerce and benefits of exposure and training from international experts
               garden                             producers of organic products       (e.g. Germany experience in production and drying of herbs)
                                                  (honey, lavender, medical         • Challenges of marketing and access to external markets to create business
                                                  herbs)                              resilience during periods of external shocks, like COVID19.
                                                                                    • Fragmentation of the many available incentives and benefit programs.
                                                                                    • Well organized common facility center needed to provide common services to
                                                                                      local SMEs
  21.07.2025   Hotel: Vivanta      20             ERA , Tourism (Jammu)             • JK ERA organization, its Structure, and functions.
               Taj (Jammu)                                                          • Department of Tourism, its Structure, functions and Role of TDAs and
                                                                                      coordination with district administration.
                                                                                    • Master planning of tourism destinations vis-à-vis local bodies
  22.07.2025   Meeting with        25             JK ERA, Tourism District          • Discussion over Tourism areas.
               the Ramban                         Administration Ramban and         • Authorities operating and their roles in the development of these areas.
               District                           officers of other departments,      Schemes of PHE and Public Works (R&B) Department running, administration
               Administration                                                         oft villages coming under TDAs, including use, ownership and transfer of
               and                                                                    assets
               Departments at                                                       • Operation of Panchayats under TDA villages.
               Udhampur                                                             • Permission required for construction of roads and other facilities in forest
               (virtual meeting                                                       areas.
               at JK TDC office,                                                    • Discussion over agriculture, floriculture, availability of local labourers.
               Jammu)



                                                                                                                                                                  Page | 21

                                                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                                                          • Discussion over involving women in cash crop cultivation, livelihood
                                                                            generation programs, and opportunities.
23.07.2025   Meeting with         40   Deputy Commissioner, Reasi,        • Overview of the Reasi district tourist destinations
             District Officials        Heads of Departments from          • Discussion over road sector, PHE works, sewage, solid waste management,
             in Reasi                  Panchayat, Public Works (R&B)        inflow of tourist and available resources, availability of water and water
                                       Department, PhE, Forest, Wild        sources,Developing/renovation/architecture of buildings in local culture style
                                       Life, Floriculture, Agriculture,     (thematic buildings), current power supply requirements and in case tourist’s
                                       Tribal, Handicraft /Handloom         footfall increases.
                                       Electricity /Power.                • Nature based tourism, JFMCs, high value forest produce in the area, status of
                                       Tourism and JK ERA                   forest rights, location of tribal and migrant villages.
                                                                          • Building bylaws and permissions.
                                                                          • Crops production, irrigation sources, HADP, horticulture produce such as
                                                                            honey, garlic, turmeric and other plants.
                                                                          • Social welfare schemes for disables, BPL and women, Discussion over nomadic
                                                                            population and other tribes
24.07.2025   Civil Secretariat,   20   CEO JK ERA, Directorate            • Housing boards schemes and planning around the identified locations with
             Jammu                     Tourism, Jammu, Housing              respect to affordable housing, nearby colonies etc.
                                       Board,                             • Handicraft and handloom initiatives, cooperative societies and their
                                       Urban local bodies (Jammu),          functioning, available grants and funds, training being provided to the locals,
                                       Rural Development, Handloom          SHGs, CLFs, Producer companies, GI tagged products, Common Facility
                                       and Handicrafts, PWD                 Centres in Kathua and Samba.
                                       (Jammu), Industries and            • Discussion over Kani Pashmina shawls known as Kani shawls, Basholi
                                       Commerce, Agriculture                Paintings, Bamboo products schemes, Tikri wood,
                                       (Jammu), MSME, Patnitop            • Discussion over linking farmers producer organization/companies,
                                       Development Authority                cooperatives and SHGs working in handloom and handicraft with tourist
                                                                            destinations so that post-project inflow of tourists can enhance their
                                                                            livelihood.
                                                                          • Discussion with rural development on key schemes and budgets, NREGS
                                                                            works, role of RLBs in sanctioning of works, SLRM status.
                                                                          • Discussion with agriculture department on key crops, eco/agro- tourism
                                                                            status.
                                                                          • Discussion with industries and MSME departments on industrial clusters, key
                                                                            industries, support received from government- infrastructure , credit,
                                                                            trainings, etc.
                                                                          • Discussion with urban development department on main works at proposed
                                                                            destinations, waste management status.


                                                                                                                                                    Page | 22

                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
24.07.2025   Civil Secretariat,   10   Social Welfare Department,       • Social Welfare Schemes for Women, BPL, and minorities and vulnerable
             Jammu                     Jammu, Tourism department          sections including children.
                                                                        • Scholarship schemes/programs for students, old age homes,
                                                                        • Discussion over GBV and available measure to curb the menace.
24.07.2025   Civil Secretariat,   15   State Forest Department -CCF     • Status of forests and protected areas, key policies, Joint Forest Management
             Jammu                     Jammu, Environment, Ecology        Committees, NTFPs
                                       and Remote Sensing, Wildlife     • Proposals from forest deptt to be taken up for funding.
                                                                        • Draft Eco-tourism policy of U.T., Eco trails, Management plan of the
                                                                          protected areas, Forest Clearances
25.07.2025   Civil Secretariat,   05   Department of Tribal Affairs     • Settled and nomadic tribals around identified locations, their migratory semi-
             Jammu                                                        annual movements, schemes, and welfare measures
                                                                        • Key issues and challenges faced by the nomadic tribes and state measures for
                                                                          their development
                                                                        • Tourism in tribal villages; scope and opportunities for homestays.
25.07.2025   Civil Secretariat,   15   CEO JK ERA and other offices,    • Last year schemes / infrastructure project in the identified locations of Public
             Jammu                     Tourism, Jammu, PWD                Works (R&B) Department and Phe.
                                       offocials of Pir Panjal &        • Current and future planning in and around identified alternative tourist
                                       Chenab Zone                        destinations by Public Works (R&B) Department and Phe.
                                                                        • Discussion over sharing of ready to execute projects/DPRs.
25.07.2025   Civil Secretariat,   40   ACS Tourism, Director Tourism,   • Proposed Project Design
             Jammu                     Jammu, JK ERA team, Housing,     • Preparatory Guidelines
                                       Director Industries and          • Sharing of the findings from the field visits and discussions
                                       commerce, Urban Local            • Progress made so far
                                       bodies, CCF-Jammu,               • Proposed governance structure for the project
                                       Environment, Ecology and
                                       Remote Sensing, Wildlife,
                                       Forest, Divisional
                                       Commissioner Patnitop
                                       Development Authority, PW
                                       (R&B) Department, JPDCL/ ERA
                                       /Jal Shakti Department
28/7/2025    Achabal Garden       30   Kokernag Development             • Tourist footfalls and trends in Achabel garden, a Mughal-era garden
                                       Authority, ERA, Tourism          • Facilities for tourists, including parking areas, drinking water and sanitation
                                       Department, divisional Jal         facilities
                                       Shakti Department, Flori         • Development plans for improvement of the garden


                                                                                                                                                    Page | 23

                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                   Culture, and Public Works
                                   (R&B) departments and
                                   municipality
28/7/2025   Kokernag          35   Sub-divisional Magistrate, CEO   • Tourist footfalls and trends to Kokernag garden and surrounding areas
            Garden                 of Kokernag DA and               • Presence of forests and protected areas
                                   representatives from Tourism     • Opportunities for eco-tourism and adventure tourism such as trekking routes,
                                   Dept and ERA and divisonal         nature trails
                                   offices of Jal Shakti, Public    • Management of municipal solid waste and wastewater
                                   Works (R&B) Department,          • Facilities for tourists, including parking areas, water supply and sanitation,
                                   Horticulture, Forest and           hotels and homestays, and health care
                                   Wildlife.
29/7/2025   Manasbal Lake     20   CEO of Development               • Eutrophication of the lake and required maintenance
                                   Authority, and representatives   • Sewage and storm water management of the surrounding villages of the lake
                                   from Tourism Dept and ERA          to minimize water quality degradation
                                   and divisonal offices of Jal     • Facilities for tourists, including parking areas, water supply and sanitation,
                                   Shakti, Public Works (R&B)         hotels and homestays, and health care
                                   Department, Horticulture,
                                   Forest and Wildlife.
30/7/2025   Department of     3     Director, Handicrafts and       • Artisanal clusters in and around 5 new destinations in Kashmir region,
            Handicrafts and        Representative, JKIDC              economic status, number of people associated, current challenges, market
            Handloom                                                  seasonality, working days available in a year, Department’s current
            office                                                    involvements (Data received)
30/7/2025   Khadi & Village   4    Deputy CEO and staff, KVIB       • KVIB’s intervention in and around 5 new destinations in Kashmir, schemes
            Industries             and JKIDC                          being implemented, number of beneficiaries, challenges, scope, other
            Board, Kashmir                                            development partners (Data received)
            division
30/7/2025   JK State Rural    3    Additional Mission Director      • SRLM’s intervention in and around 5 new destinations, number of people
            Livelihood             and staff of JKSRLM, JKIDC         associated, Challenges, current programs being implemented (Data received)
            Mission
            (JKSRLM),
            Umeed Program
31/7/2025   JK Forest         1    Director, JKTDCL                 • NTFP (non-timber forest products) in and around 9 destinations in J&K
            Department,                                             • Number of people associated in NTFP based businesses, challenges, scope
            JKTDCL office                                             (Data received)




                                                                                                                                              Page | 24

                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
31/7/2025   JK Tribal          1    Director, Tribal Affairs         • Tribal knowledge-based products and services, farm and non-farm produces in
            Development,                                               and around 9 new destinations, number of people associated, challenges,
            JKTDCL                                                     scope (Data received)
01/8/2025   JK Handloom        3    JKICD, KVIB and JKSRLM           • Artisanal clusters in and around 5 new destinations in Jammu region,
            and Handicrafts         Jammu division                     economic status, number of people associated, current challenges, market
            Department,                                                seasonality, working days available in a year, Department’s current
            Jammu,                                                     involvements
            Department                                               • SRLM’s intervention in and around 4 new destinations in Jammu region,
            office                                                     number of people associated, Challenges, current programs being
                                                                       implemented.
                                                                     • KVIB’s intervention in and around 4 new destinations in Jammu, schemes
                                                                       being implemented, number of beneficiaries, challenges, scope, other
                                                                       development partners
4/8/2025    Meeting with       25   JKTDCL, JK ERA, Tourism          • Discussion over Project Concept and development objectives, expected
            the JK ERA and          Department, EY Team                results, and a component-wise structure for sustainable tourism in J&K.
            Tourism                                                  • Investment under Components 1, 2, and 3 was discussed, focusing on strategic
            department,                                                tourism planning, strengthening service delivery, and building a robust project
            Kashmir Division                                           management system.
                                                                     • Local enterprise and investment promotion were emphasized through PPP
                                                                       models, support for MSMEs and startups, skill development programs, and
                                                                       women’s entrepreneurship with gender tagging.
                                                                     • The need to improve local service delivery was underlined as essential for
                                                                       enhancing visitor experience and long-term sustainability of destinations.
                                                                     • Action points included collecting comprehensive data on transport networks,
                                                                       compiling reliable information on solid waste management, and mapping
                                                                       gender-disaggregated skills through NRLM.
                                                                     • A review of projects under line departments recommended focusing on DPR-
                                                                       ready or sanction-stage projects with land availability, ensuring convergence
                                                                       with existing investments and avoiding duplication.
5/8/2025    Meetings at        25   Local and revenue                • Replacement of worn-out pipes in Kokarnag TDA area, Parking facility,
            Srinagar in             administration- Kokernag,          Construction of Clock Tower in Kokernag market. Beautification of market and
            August                  Tourism Development                Kokarnag garden.
                                    Authority, Public Works (R&B)    • Linking of Kokernag with other major nearby tourist destinations
                                    Department, Forest, Wild Life,   • Solid Watse Treatment Plant Proposal, Cultural Tourism.
                                    PHE



                                                                                                                                              Page | 25

                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
5/8/2025    Meeting with       10   Tribal Affairs                     • Semi-annual Transhumance movement routes, interaction with mainstream
            Tribal Affairs -        JK ERA                                populations, schemes, and welfare measures
            Srinagar                Tourism directorate, Jammu         • Applicable Acts and protective measures for tribals.
            (Virtual)                                                  • Tourism in tribal villages and training of village youth; scope and
                                                                          opportunities, including piloting of Tourist Tribal Village Programme
                                                                       • Community Forest Rights (FRA)-2006
6/8/2025    Taj Srinagar       5    Representatives of Taj and Lalit   • Post covid years have seen a significant increase in Indian tourists and MICE
            Lalit Srinagar          at Srinagar                           Tourism, the latter seeing significant uptick in last two years.
                                                                       • Hotels have witnessed 100 percent capacity bookings at INR 30,000 per night
                                                                          (pre-April 2025)
                                                                       • Key target groups for high end hotels are Indian and NRI tourists, MICE
                                                                          tourism and weddings.
                                                                       • International tourists are not the main target group for the next 3-5 years.
                                                                       • Need for creating physical and tourist infrastructure at destinations as well as
                                                                          skilling local population.
                                                                       • Licensing, certification challenges
                                                                       • Need for revisiting master plans as well as state tourism policy
                                                                       • Need for creating physical and tourist infrastructure at destinations as well as
                                                                          skilling local population.
                                                                       • Licensing, certification challenges
                                                                       • Need for revisiting master plans as well as state tourism policy
10/9/2025   Noorbagh,          10   Noor Aari Crafts Producer          The visit aimed to understand the value chain development pilot’s effects on
            Srinagar                Company (an artisan                nonfarm livelihoods and explore scaling opportunities and challenges within
                                    community-led enterprise           artisan clusters.
                                    established under the JTFRP        • Economic growth in artisan cluster: The intervention generated Rs 3.00 Crores
                                    project to restore and             in business benefiting 600 artisans, with average monthly incomes rising from Rs
                                    strengthen livelihoods in          3,000-3,500 to Rs 8,000-10,000.
                                    Srinagar)                          • Social empowerment outcomes: The project established J&K’s first community-
                                                                       led, artisan-owned producer company with 98% female membership, enabling
                                                                       members to work independently from middlemen and enhancing their business
                                                                       and leadership skills.
                                                                       • Organizational progress and challenges: The company is registered with
                                                                       relevant government bodies, holds an import-export license, and complies with
                                                                       legal requirements, yet faces challenges including low business volume, limited
                                                                       marketing channels, and lack of working capital for stock creation



                                                                                                                                                  Page | 26

                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
9/9/2025     Meeting with       8          Representative, Trave/Taxi    • New destinations are required to be added.
             private travel                Federation; CEO, Srinagar     • Lack of master plans and infrastructure in smaller destinations resulting in lack
             and tourism                   Tours and Travels;              of quality hotels
             agencies                      Representative, Hotel         • Government must plan ringfenced destinations and as per carrying capacity.
             federations                   Federation (Srinagar);          Overcrowding is a new phenomenon in Kashmir which only occurred between
                                           Operator, Adventure Tourism     2022-2025 (March).
                                                                         • Lack of basic services in new as well as existing destinations is a major cause of
                                                                           pollution/degradation (example: poor septage management in dull lake, little
                                                                           or no waste management in tourist destinations, poor road access, lack of
                                                                           availability of filtered water).
                                                                         • There is a lack of trained entry level professionals. JK development center
                                                                           (JKEDI) provides generic entrepreneur training. The curriculum should be
                                                                           modified to include front office management, food, tourist guides etc. Market
                                                                           driven course curriculum design in consultation with people in industry.
                                                                         • Rail connectivity to tourism is expected to increase tourist footfall significantly
                                                                         • Currently, destinations are “destinations for everybody” versus unique
                                                                           destinations with unique selling propositions.
                                                                         • Government can consider small loans for MSMEs and small hotel owners.
8/9/2025     International      4          Representatives of group of   • Kashmir attractiveness beyond expectations
             adventure                     international tourists of a   • Quality of accommodation and hospitality facilities
             tourists - Lalit              Himalayan Overland            • Feedback form high-spending tourism segment
             Hotel                         Adventure tour
9/9/2025     Meeting with       5          Owner, Artisan Center;        •   Most embroidery and textile related handicrafts are now undertaken by
             exporters                     Exporters, pashmina shawls        women
                                           and wool garments             • Many women prefer to undertake these works from their homes
                                                                         • Pashmina wool is brought from Ladakh and other countries. Weaving of
                                                                             shawls and embroidery is undertaken in Kashmir.
                                                                         • High end shawls are mostly exported to other countries. Exporters of
                                                                             pashmina shawls face issues at customs to verify the wool used in the
                                                                             shawls/garments. GI testing labs in Srinagar would greatly help in this.
                                                                         Handwoven and hand embroidered garments now face significant competition
                                                                         from machine made and embroidered wool garments.
14/10/2025   Early Market       22 firms   Works contractors,            • Certain concessions should be allowed for local firms for their capacity
             Engagement         (hybrid    Consultancy firms.                building as applicable under other Government of India guidelines.
                                mode)



                                                                                                                                                      Page | 27

                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                                                                   •   CVs should be given more weightage and strict provisions should be there to
                                                                                       restrict frequent changes of experts by the firms.
                                                                                   •   Presentation of the methodology to be made a part of the evaluation.
                                                                                   •   Details regarding the tender issuing Authority.
                                                                                   •   Details on the Implementation Structure of the Project.
10-           Tourist Survey    126              International and Domestic        •     97 percent of the respondents were Indian tourists and 3 percent were
16/10/2025    (preliminary      responses        Tourists                                international tourists
              survey)                                                               • 50 percent of the tourists were from Jammu and Kashmir, followed by Delhi
                                                                                         (14 percent) and Maharashtra (11 percent). Limited tourists were from
                                                                                         southern India.
                                                                                    • 70 percent of the tourists were youth/under 35. Tourists between ages 18-
                                                                                         25 years comprised 30 percent of total travelers and between 25-35
                                                                                         comprised 40 percent of total travelers.
                                                                                    • Hospitality of the state was rated highest and infrastructure and connectivity
                                                                                         rated lowest in terms of experience.
                                                                                    • Almost all tourists were visiting on account of nature and adventure
                                                                                         experience. Heritage and culture followed by spirituality were other key
                                                                                         reasons for visiting the state.
                                                                                    • Summer months followed by winter are the key times for visit.
More consultations with stakeholders, including service providers/tourism dependent businesses, tourists, civil society organizations, etc will be added as they are
continued to be carried out continued to be carried out in the coming months, the early stages of implementation and throughout the life of the Project at regular
intervals, as needed.




                                                                                                                                                             Page | 28

                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
