Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                           Report No: PADHI01322




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                   INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

                                                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                      ON A

                                                                               PROPOSED LOAN

                                                                    IN THE AMOUNT OF US$245 MILLION

                                                                                       TO




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                     INDIA

                                                                                     FOR A

                                   RESILIENT ACTION FOR DEVELOPMENT AND DISASTER RECOVERY HIMACHAL PRADESH PROJECT


                                                                              JANUARY 27, 2026




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                Urban, Resilience and Land Global Practice
                                South Asia Region

                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
               CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

     (Exchange Rate Effective December 31, 2025)

          Currency Unit = INDIAN RUPEE (INR)
               INR 87.78 = US$1



                     FISCAL YEAR
                   April 1 - March 31




  Regional Vice President: Johannes C.M. Zutt
Regional Practice Director: Pankaj Gupta
        Country Director: Paul Procee (Acting)
        Practice Manager: Abedalrazq F. Khalil
      Task Team Leaders: Anup Karanth, Melanie S. Kappes
                 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AFD        Agence Française de Développement (French Development Agency)
CBO        Community Business Organization
DoE        Directorate of Energy
DMC        Disaster Management Cell
DRFI       Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance
E&S        Environmental and Social
ESF        Environmental and Social Framework
ESCP       Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESIA       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESS        Environmental and Social Standards
EWS        Early Warning System
FM         Financial Management
GLOF       Glacier Lake Outburst Flood
GoHP       Government of Himachal Pradesh
GoI        Government of India
GRS        Grievance Redress Service
HP         Himachal Pradesh
HEP        Hydroelectric Project
IA         Implementing Agency
IBRD       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IPF        Investment Project Financing
JSV        Jal Shakti Vibhag
M&E        Monitoring and Evaluation
MFD        Maximizing Finance for Development
MFD-EP     MFD-Enabling Project
NCB        National Competitive Bidding
PCE        Private Capital Enabling
PCM        Private Capital Mobilization
PDO        Project Development Objective
PIU        Project Implementation Unit
PMU        Project Management Unit
PMTC       Project Management and Technical Consultants
POM        Project Operations Manual
PPSD       Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PSC        Project Steering Committee
PWD        Public Works Department
READY-HP   Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh
RPF        Resettlement Policy Framework
SEA/SH     Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment
SEP        Stakeholder Engagement Plan
STEP       Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
TSA        Technical Service Agency
UA         Universally Aligned
The World Bank
Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh                                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
(P513815)



                                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS

 DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i
 I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 1
       A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................1
       B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................................1
 II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 3
       A. Project Development Objective .......................................................................................................3
       B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .............................................................................................4
       C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................4
       D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................5
       E. Role of Partners ................................................................................................................................9
       F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design......................................................................9
 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 10
       A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................10
       B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ..................................................11
       C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................12
 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 12
       A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ..................................................................................12
       B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................16
       C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ...................................................................19
 V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 20
 ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 22
        The World Bank
        Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh         PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P513815)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
India                    Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh
                                                     Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument                                               Process
                                                     Classification
                         Investment Project                                                 Urgent Need or Capacity
P513815                                              High
                         Financing (IPF)                                                    Constraints(FCC)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                     [✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                   [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                        [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                              [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                    [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                          [✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                 [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
10-Feb-2026                            31-Mar-2031
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No


Proposed Development Objective(s)
To support resilient disaster recovery and livelihoods, and increase state capacities for risk-informed development.


Components
 Component Name                                                                                              Cost (US$)

                                                                                                                          i
     The World Bank
     Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     (P513815)



 Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Reforms for Resilience                             156,002,100.00
 Component 2: Resilient Infrastructure and Livelihoods Recovery                                  225,135,400.00
 Component 3: Implementation Support                                                              25,112,500.00
 Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response                                                                    0.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower:                       India

 Implementing Agency:           Department of Revenue (DM-Cell), Government of Himachal Pradesh; Directorate
                                of Energy; Public Works Department; Jal Shakti Vibhag



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           Yes

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                   406.25

  Total Financing                                                                                        406.25
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                           245.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                            0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                          245.00

 Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Commercial Financing                                                                                  100.00

      Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                  100.00

                                                                                                                  ii
     The World Bank
     Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     (P513815)



   Counterpart Funding                                                                                      61.25

      National Government                                                                                   61.25


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year                2026            2027          2028            2029           2030          2031        2032

Annual             15.00            50.00         75.00           75.00         17.00          12.00        1.00
Cumulative         15.00            65.00        140.00           215.00        232.00         244.00      245.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                          Contributing Practice Areas
Urban, Resilience and Land                                    Water; Transport; Energy & Extractives

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                 ⚫ Moderate
2. Macroeconomic                                                            ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Substantial
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Substantial
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Substantial
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ High


                                                                                                                    iii
     The World Bank
     Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh           PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     (P513815)



8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Moderate
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Substantial


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                            Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                     Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate

                                                                                                                      iv
     The World Bank
     Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     (P513815)



LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Section I.A.1, Schedule to the Project Agreement: The Project Implementing Entity shall vest the responsibility for
overall management, implementation and monitoring of the Project in the Project Management Unit within the
Disaster Management Cell, which will implement the Project with assistance from PWD, JSV and DoE, as set forth in the
Project Operations Manual.
Section I.A.2(a), Schedule to the Project Agreement: The Project Implementing Entity shall maintain, throughout the
Project implementation period, a PMU within the Disaster Management Cell, headed by a Project Director, who shall be
a serving officer not below the rank of a Principal Secretary, assisted by a Deputy Project Director, with competent staff
and consultants in adequate number and with experience, qualification, and under terms of reference, acceptable to
the Bank, which shall be provided with such powers, financial resources, functions, and competencies, acceptable to
the Bank and as shall be required for it to carry out overall planning, day-to-day Project operations, management,
coordination, performance monitoring, fiduciary management, compliance with environmental and social standards for
the Project, and reporting; and to serve as the implementation unit for carrying out activities related to livelihoods and
strengthening of disaster risk management under the Project.
Section I.A.2(b), Schedule to the Project Agreement: The Project Implementing Entity shall establish, within three (3)
months from the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain, throughout the Project implementation period, three Project
Implementation Units, one each in PWD, DoE, and JSV, with competent personnel in adequate number and with
experience, qualification, and under terms of reference, acceptable to the Bank, which shall be provided with such
powers, financial resources, functions, and competencies, acceptable to the Bank and as shall be required for them to
carry out, inter alia, activities related to recovery of transport corridors and public buildings, power sector recovery,
water sector recovery and allied irrigation and sanitation work, and institutional strengthening for ensuring resilience
and sustainability.
Section I.A.2(c), Schedule to the Project Agreement: The Project Implementing Entity shall establish, within three (3)
months of the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain throughout the Project implementation period, a Project Steering
Committee, chaired by the Chief Secretary to GoHP, and comprised of representatives from relevant departments and
agencies, which shall be responsible for, inter alia, providing overall strategic direction, inter-departmental
coordination, and approving or amending Project investments.
Section I.A.2(d), Schedule to the Project Agreement: The Project Implementing Entity shall establish, within three (3)
months of the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain throughout the Project implementation period, a Project
Executive Committee, chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary of the Revenue Department, which shall be responsible
for, inter alia, overseeing day-to-day Project implementation; and assisting the Project Management Unit with inter-
agency coordination.
Section I.A.2(e), Schedule to the PA: The Project Implementing Entity shall provide budget allocation on annual basis
and transfer the funds to PWD, DoE and JSV in accordance with the Annual Work Plan and Budget.
Section I.A.2(f), Schedule to the Project Agreement: The Project Implementing Entity shall cause the PMU, PWD, DoE
and JSV, each, to select and engage, and thereafter maintain throughout the Project implementation period, the
services of Project Management and Technical Consultants (“PMTC”), with qualification and experience and under
terms of reference acceptable to the Bank, in order to assist the PWD, DoE and JSV with planning and implementation
of their respective parts of the Project including, inter alia, providing regional and global expertise to advise on tailored
solutions, facilitating knowledge exchange, and building capacity.

                                                                                                                          v
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



Section I.A.2(g), Schedule to the Project Agreement: The Project Implementing Entity shall ensure that adequate
financial management arrangements are in place, within three (3) months of the Effective Date, including the
appointment of qualified financial management staff, as set forth in the Project Operations Manual.
Section I.A.2(h), Schedule to the PA: The Project Implementing Entity shall ensure appointment of qualified
procurement staff for implementation of the Project, as set forth in the Project Operations Manual.
Section I.B, Schedule to the Project Agreement: The Project Implementing Entity shall prepare and adopt, by not later
than three (3) months after the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain, throughout the implementation period of the
Project, the Project Operations Manual in form and with substance satisfactory to the Bank; and ensure that the Project
is carried out in accordance with the Project Operations Manual.
Section I.C, Schedule to the Project Agreement: The Project Implementing Entity shall prepare and adopt, by not later
than three (3) months after the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain, throughout the implementation period of the
Project, the Grant Manual in form and with substance satisfactory to the Bank; and ensure that Part 2.4(ix) of the
Project is carried out in accordance with the Grant Manual.
Section I.D, Schedule to the Project Agreement: The Project Implementing Entity shall ensure that Grants are made to
selected Community Business Organizations (“Beneficiaries”) in accordance with the eligibility criteria and procedures
set forth in the Grant Manual. Upon selection of Beneficiaries based on grant proposals submitted by the Community
Business Organizations in accordance with the Grant Manual, the Project Implementing Entity shall issue a Grant
Approval Letter to each Beneficiary, under terms and conditions acceptable to the Bank, as set forth in the Grant
Manual.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                           Citation                       Description                    Financing Source
                                                              No withdrawal shall be
                                                              made for payments made
                                                              prior to the Signature Date,
                                                              except that withdrawals up
                                                              to an aggregate amount
                               Section III.B.1(a), Schedule
Disbursement                                                  not to exceed $49,000,000      IBRD/IDA
                               2 to the Loan Agreement
                                                              may be made for payments
                                                              made prior to this date but
                                                              on or after March 31, 2025
                                                              for Eligible Expenditures
                                                              under Category (1).
                                                              No withdrawal shall be
                                                              made for Grants under
                                                              Category (2), unless and
                               Section III.B.1(b), Schedule   until the Project
Disbursement                                                                                 IBRD/IDA
                               2 to the Loan Agreement        Implementing Entity has
                                                              prepared and adopted the
                                                              Grant Manual, acceptable
                                                              to the Bank.


                                                                                                                    vi
     The World Bank
     Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh         PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     (P513815)



                                                            No withdrawal shall be
                                                            made for Emergency
                                                            Expenditures under
                                                            Category (3), unless and
                                                            until all of the following
                                                            conditions have been met
                                                            in respect of said
                                                            expenditures: (i) (A) the
                                                            Borrower and/or the
                                                            Project Implementing
                                                            Entity, as the case may be,
                                                            has/have determined that
                                                            an Eligible Crisis or
                                                            Emergency has occurred,
                                                            and has/have furnished to
                                                            the Bank a request to
                             Section III.B.1(c), Schedule
Disbursement                                                withdraw Loan amounts         IBRD/IDA
                             2 to the Loan Agreement
                                                            under Category (3); and (B)
                                                            the Bank has agreed with
                                                            such determination,
                                                            accepted said request and
                                                            notified the Borrower, and
                                                            the Project Implementing
                                                            Entity, as the case may be,
                                                            thereof; and (ii) the
                                                            Borrower and/or the
                                                            Project Implementing
                                                            Entity, as the case may be,
                                                            has/have adopted the CERC
                                                            Manual and Emergency
                                                            Action Plan, in form and
                                                            substance acceptable to
                                                            the Bank.
                                                            The Public Works
                                                            Department (“PWD”), Jal
                                                            Shakti Vibhag (“JSV”), and
                                                            Directorate of Energy
Effectiveness                Section 4.01(a)                (“DoE”) have each selected    IBRD/IDA
                                                            and engaged the services of
                                                            Project Management and
                                                            Technical Consultants
                                                            (“PMTC”).
                                                            The Project Implementing
Effectiveness                Section 4.01(b)                                              IBRD/IDA
                                                            Entity has established and
                                                                                                            vii
The World Bank
Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
(P513815)



                                                     publicized an accessible
                                                     grievance mechanism, to
                                                     receive and facilitate
                                                     resolution of concerns and
                                                     grievances in relation to
                                                     the Project, in a manner
                                                     acceptable to the Bank.




                                                                                                    viii
        The World Bank
        Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P513815)



  I.   STRATEGIC CONTEXT
 A. Project Strategic Context
1.      As India’s economy continues to grow and poverty declines1, disaster risks increasingly challenge
developmental gains, particularly in vulnerable states located in the Himalayan range. The increasing frequency and
severity of extreme weather events such as cloudbursts2, floods, debris flows, and landslides pose substantial threats
across the complex terrains of India’s hill states, particularly during the monsoon season. These areas are characterized
by a young and fragile geology, marked by steep and unstable slopes and narrow floodplains that provide limited flat
land—often used for construction but highly exposed to floods and debris flows. In addition to flash floods, landslides,
and debris flows frequently triggered by cloudbursts, the Himalaya region is also exposed to earthquakes, glacier lake
outburst floods (GLOFs), avalanches, droughts, and forest fires.
2.       Himachal Pradesh (HP) faces a growing threat to its development gains and poverty reduction from recurring
natural hazards and extreme weather events that disrupt economic activity, livelihoods, and jobs. HP is a northern
Indian state in the western Himalayas, with around 7 million people, an area of 55,673 km², and an economy relying mainly
on agriculture, tourism, and hydropower. Multidimensional poverty in HP fell3 from 8 percent in 2015–2016 to 5 percent
in 2019–2021—equivalent to nearly 200,000 fewer people living in multidimensional poverty. Over the past three years,
the state has experienced over 66 cloudbursts, 234 landslides, and 121 flash floods, resulting in losses exceeding US$1.5
billion according to the Government of Himachal Pradesh (GoHP). Recovery needs are estimated to be over six times the
state’s five-year (2021-2026) allocation under the State Disaster Risk Management Funds; even with additional support
from the National Disaster Risk Management Fund, these damages have been only partially addressed. Damages to roads,
water supply, and energy infrastructure consistently comprise about 80 percent of losses, disrupting connectivity, service
delivery, and market access in remote districts such as Chamba, Kullu, Mandi, and Una. Agriculture, horticulture, and
tourism—employing over half the state’s workforce—are particularly affected, leading to widespread income instability,
seasonal job losses, and outmigration from rural areas. With limited insurance coverage and constrained fiscal space,
repeated recovery expenditure diverts resources from development investments and undermines sustainable job creation
and growth.

 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
3.      Cloudbursts, flash floods, debris flows, and landslide incidents triggered by heavy monsoon rains (June-
September 2025) caused extensive damage across all 12 districts of HP, resulting in 486 fatalities and losses estimated
at US$653 million. Transport infrastructure was the most impacted (US$362.63 million in damages), followed by water,
sanitation and irrigation (US$177.25 million), and power infrastructure (US$35.8 million), adding to the accumulated
damages from events during previous years. Around 20 percent of the state’s road network was affected, more than 4,900
water supply schemes were damaged, and over 15 hydroelectric projects (HEP) sustained losses. Given the scale and
cumulative nature of the recovery needs, available funding has largely been absorbed by urgent repairs and restoration
of essential services. While these efforts have been crucial, much of the damage remains unaddressed, heightening the
vulnerability of infrastructure systems. In addition, the 2025 impacts followed similarly devastating monsoon seasons in
2023 and 2024, with losses in 2023 that totaled about US$970 million and the 2024 monsoon that resulted in estimated
losses of about US$156 million. The recurring nature of such losses underscores systemic weaknesses in infrastructure

1 World Bank. Poverty and Equity Brief, October 2025.
2 According to the India Meteorological Department, a cloudburst is a sudden rainfall of 100 mm or more within an hour over a small area.
3 As measured by Niti Aayog’s multidimensional poverty index methodology, 2023.


                                                                                                                                            Page 1
        The World Bank
        Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh                           PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P513815)



planning, design, maintenance, and recovery4 and highlights the need to embed resilience standards across the asset life
cycle.
4.       Employment and livelihoods across key economic sectors suffered severe direct and indirect impacts. The
districts with the highest losses, i.e., Chamba, Shimla, Mandi, and Kullu are home to the state’s ‘apple belt’ and unique
crafts sectors such as weaving and metal works. Agricultural and horticultural sectors, which employ about 54 percent of
the workforce and contribute about 14 percent to state gross domestic product, faced severe losses from soil erosion,
pest outbreaks, and blocked transport routes. Apple farming, vital to over 150,000 small farming households, was severely
impacted by road closures preventing timely market access and rainfall-induced pest infestations damaging crops5 and
resulting in over US$260 million losses.6 Non-farm livelihoods, including artisanal workshops and small-scale enterprises,
experienced asset destruction such as damaged tools and stocks, compounded by disrupted connectivity that stalled
production and sales. Tourism, which contributes 7 percent to the state’s gross domestic product and contributes to
around 14 percent direct and indirect employment7, came to a near standstill in major destinations such as Kullu, Manali,
and Dharmshala due to unsafe roads and widespread service interruptions.
5.       The increasing severity and adverse effects of disaster events in HP reveal the need for a systemic approach to
preventing, mitigating, and financial protection against disaster risk. Climate change has resulted in variations in the
occurrence of natural hazards in recent years, and these are projected to continue. The monsoon is expected to become
more intense and erratic, with heavier rainfall concentrated in shorter periods, increased intra-seasonal variability, and
prolonged dry spells. Glaciers, snow cover, and permafrost are projected to decline substantially, altering the seasonal
patterns of meltwater contributions to river flows, destabilizing high mountain slopes, and heightening the risk of GLOFs8.
In combination with recent disasters caused by sudden cloudbursts, evolving landslide hotspots, and high velocity debris
flows, this shows an urgent need for hazard zonation, delineation of high exposure locations, and risk-informed land use
planning. Despite recurring events, state capabilities are limited for hazard monitoring or forecasting; for early warnings
for infrastructure operations (e.g., of water intake structures); and for preventing unsafe construction in high-risk areas.
This includes weak enforcement of building regulations. Hazard analytics and network risk assessments are essential to
support HP’s deteriorating public service systems, by identifying vulnerabilities and addressing them. Further, despite
severe financing constraints, disaster risk is primarily borne through public sector financing without pre-arranged post-
disaster financing through risk transfer. Given the scale of accumulated losses, HP urgently needs a diversified disaster
risk financing strategy that: (a) meets the financing requirements for climate-proofing vulnerable assets, particularly the
extensive housing stock; and (b) manages the state’s growing contingent liabilities arising from repeated housing damage,
escalating disaster-induced losses in productive sectors such as horticulture (especially apple farming), and recurrent
damage to public infrastructure.
6.      The emergency operation, Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (READY-
HP), will support resilient recovery from the impacts of the disaster events through building back better while
strengthening the state’s capacity for risk-informed and climate-resilient development. Recognizing the serious situation
following accumulated damages and losses from disaster events, the Government of India (GoI) in its 2024-2025 budget
announcement committed to supporting disaster recovery in Himanchal Pradesh through multilateral assistance. READY-


4 GoHP Final Memorandum of Damages due to Flash Floods, Cloudbursts, and Landslides during Monsoon Season 2025, 2024, 2023.
5 The New Indian Express. Himachal apple farmers in dire straits as monsoon wreaks havoc.
6 Down To Earth. Floods in Himachal seal roads, leading to losses for apple farmers.
7 Himachal Pradesh Economic Survey 2022-2023.
8 Gurung, D.R. 2019. The Hindu Kush Himalaya Assessment. Chapter 11 - Disaster Risk Reduction and Building Resilience in the Hindu Kush Himalaya.


                                                                                                                                         Page 2
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



HP will assist the GoHP in restoring key public infrastructure in the three most affected sectors, i.e., transport, water and
sanitation, and power while revitalizing livelihoods and employment and advancing a comprehensive disaster risk
financing and insurance (DRFI) strategy. Achieving these goals requires investments that simultaneously deliver: (a) the
immediate recovery and reconstruction of critical assets; (b) institutional capacity-building for systemic risk reduction; and
(c) robust financial mechanisms for disaster resilience. The design of READY-HP draws from the experience of previous
recovery projects (see paragraphs 25 to 32) recognizing that post-disaster contexts offer a unique window of opportunity
for institutional reforms and long-term resilience building. Central to this approach are more and better jobs: livelihood
recovery will support sustained better job opportunities across agriculture, tourism, and small enterprises—helping
restore incomes and build a more resilient local economy; more reliable public services (transport, water, and energy) will
reduce disruptions and impacts on jobs and livelihoods; and reconstruction activities will generate temporary
employment, providing immediate income support and minimizing disruptions to the labor market in the short term.
7.      READY-HP will complement and closely coordinate with ongoing World Bank-financed operations in the state,
including the HP State Roads Transformation Project (P163328), the HP Power Sector Development Program (P176032),
the Shimla-HP Water Supply and Sewerage Services Improvement Program (P174732), and the Integrated Project for
Source Sustainability and Climate Resilient Rain-fed Agriculture in HP (P165129). While these operations focus on overall
sectoral strengthening, READY-HP will complement ongoing activities by enhancing institutional capacity for disaster and
climate risk reduction, recovery, and construction of assets to higher structural performance standards.



 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
 A. Project Development Objective
 8.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support resilient disaster recovery and livelihoods, and increase
 state capacities for risk-informed development.




                                                                                                                       Page 3
        The World Bank
        Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P513815)


 B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators




                                                             Figure 1: Theory of Change

 9.        The Project will measure progress toward the PDO via the following indicators:
           (a) People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people, disaggregated by gender and
               youth)CRI, Climate
           (b) Line departments integrating resilience analytics into risk-informed decision making (Number)
           (c) People benefiting from new or better9 jobs (Number of people, disaggregated by gender) CRI, Gender

 C. Project Beneficiaries
10.     READY-HP is expected to benefit approximately 2.35 million people. This includes over 2 million people from
disaster-affected communities, particularly those living in villages and cities along the Shimla, Mandi, Hamirpur, and
Dharamshala zones, who will have more reliable access to transport connectivity, water and sanitation services, and

9 Better jobs are defined as jobs with a salary increase of at least 10 percent between project beginning/baseline and project closing/endline.


                                                                                                                                              Page 4
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



energy supply. Furthermore, about 12,000 artisans, farmers, and service providers, especially women, will benefit from
higher income and more resilient livelihoods. Populations residing in flood-prone areas covered by the early warning
system will gain access to critical information that supports preparedness for natural hazards and response actions. Finally,
the line departments involved will benefit from increased capacity.

 D. Project Components
11.      The project design combines critical recovery investments in the most-affected infrastructure and livelihoods
sectors with measures to create an enabling ecosystem for private capital mobilization, alongside long-term
institutional reforms for resilience building. Component 1 focuses on strengthening institutional capacity and systems
for resilience, while Component 2 supports recovery, rehabilitation, and reconstruction investments. The list of areas
where the activities under the project will be implemented in the State of Himachal Pradesh, selected in accordance with
World Bank policies and technical criteria, will be specified in the Project Operations Manual. Total International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) financing for this project is US$245 million, including a front-end fee of
US$612,500.
12.    The project will include the following activities in selected areas (see Table 1), which are agreed between the
GoHP and the World Bank and set forth in the Project Operations Manual (POM).
                                            Table 1: Project Components and Activities

                  Component                                      Activities                  Cost*         Implementing
                                                                                         (US$ million,        Agency
                                                                                           rounded)
 Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Reforms for Resilience (Total: US$156 million; of which IBRD:
 US$44.8 million; GoHP: US$11.2 million; and PCM: US$100 million)
 Sub-component 1.1: Institutional                  • Institutional mechanisms for         Total: 23.4    PWD, JSV, DoE,
 strengthening and reforms of state                  resilience                           IBRD: 18.7     DMC
 infrastructure departments                        • Resilience Guidelines for            GoHP: 4.7      JSV (flood risk
                                                     infrastructure assets                               assessments)
                                                   • Flood risk assessments
 Sub-component 1.2: Institutional                  • Flood Zoning                        Total: 132.6    DMC
 strengthening and reforms at state level          • Development Control                  IBRD: 26.1
                                                     Regulations                          GoHP: 6.5
                                                   • Flood Early Warning System            PCM: 100
                                                   • Disaster Risk Financing and
                                                     Insurance Strategy
                                                   • Pilot Financing Instrument
 Component 2: Resilient Infrastructure and Livelihoods Recovery (Total: US$225.1 million; of which IBRD: US$180.1
 million; GoHP: US$45 million)
 Sub-component 2.1: Resilient reconstruction • Roads                                     Total: 118.7    PWD
 of roads, bridges, and public buildings     • Bridges                                    IBRD: 95
                                             • Footbridges                               GoHP: 23.7

                                                                                                                       Page 5
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



                                                  • Health Facilities
                                                  • Education Facilities
                                                  • Multi-purpose Relief Shelters
 Sub-component 2.2: Resilient reconstruction • Water supply                             Total: 59     JSV
 of water supply, sanitation, and irrigation • Sanitation                              IBRD: 47.2
                                             • Irrigation                              GoHP: 11.8
 Sub-component 2.3: Resilient reconstruction • HEP assets                              Total: 33.5    DoE
 of power supply infrastructure              • Transmission lines and towers           IBRD: 26.8
                                             • Small solar power plants                GoHP: 6.7
                                             • Emergency restoration
                                               systems

 Sub-component 2.4: Resilient livelihoods         Value chain improvements in 12       Total: 13.9    DMC
                                                  segments                             IBRD: 11.1
                                                                                       GoHP: 2.8
 Component 3: Implementation Support (Total: US$24.5 million; of which IBRD: US$19.5 million; GoHP US$5.05
 million)
 -                                                PMTCs                                Total: 24.5    DMC; PWD, JSV,
                                                                                       IBRD: 19.5     DoE
                                                                                       GoHP: 5.05

 Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million)
 -                                                                                          0         DMC
*Not including a front-end fee of US$612,500

13.      Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Reforms for Resilience (Total: US$156 million; of which IBRD:
US$44.8 million; GoHP: US$11.2 million; and Private Capital Mobilization (PCM): US$100 million). To systematically
address Himachal Pradesh’s growing disaster and climate risks, this component aims at strengthening institutional
capacity for resilient recovery and risk-informed development. Sub-component 1.1. will strengthen capacity in three
selected public services departments in HP and sub-component 1.2. will enhance systems, analytics, and capacity at the
state level that will benefit risk reduction efforts by multiple stakeholders.
14.      Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Strengthening and Reforms of State Infrastructure Departments (Total:
US$23.4 million; of which IBRD: US$18.7 million; GoHP: US$4.7 million). This sub-component focuses on strengthening
the Public Works Department’s (PWD), Jal Shakti Vibhag’s (JSV), and the Directorate of Energy’s (DoE) institutional
capacity, technical expertise and systems for resilient recovery, and more broadly, risk-informed planning, management,
and operation of public service systems. To achieve this, dedicated resilience cells with clearly defined roles and
responsibilities will be established in PWD, JSV, and DoE, by assignment of current staff to this specific role. These cells
will be involved in the development of planned hazard and risk analytics, will take ownership of finalized models and
hazard/risk information, and will support the departments with the application of this information for READY-HP activities
and beyond. The process will be accompanied by targeted training and hands-on capacity building. Resilience cells may
also be further supported by technical experts to ensure effective deployment, operation, and long-term maintenance of

                                                                                                                     Page 6
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



the analytics and systems. As a result, the resilience cells will produce critical analytical outputs—including flood forecasts,
landslide susceptibility assessments, flood protection strategies, resilience guidelines, and infrastructure risk
assessments—to inform operation and maintenance planning, strategic decision-making, and investment prioritization.
Institutional strengthening efforts will focus on formalizing standard operating procedures and strengthening inter-agency
coordination to enhance efficiency and sustainability. Details regarding the staffing, operational linkages, and financial
sustainability of these cells will be identified and documented in their respective establishment documents.
15.      This sub-component will also support the development of guidelines for resilient planning, design, construction,
and maintenance across key asset types, i.e., bridges, culverts, road, water supply, irrigation and sanitation, power
generation, transmission, and distribution infrastructure as well as associated slope stabilization and erosion protection
measures. These guidelines will be both informed by and applied to the rehabilitation and reconstruction of assets
financed under Component 2; and consolidated for use beyond READY-HP to inform resilient reconstruction for
infrastructure development across the state. Further, this component will support the development of guidelines for
emergency procurement and contract management.
16.     Sub-component 1.2: Institutional Strengthening and Reforms at State level (Total: US$132.6 million; of which
IBRD: US$26.1 million; GoHP: US$6.5 million; and PCM: US$100 million). This sub-component supports institutional
strengthening at the state level for resilient recovery, including strengthening financial resilience of the State, and risk
mitigation across departments and districts. Key activities include: (a) developing flood plain zoning across select basins,
demarcating flood-prone zones, and updating general development control regulations in select areas in both urban and
rural contexts to ensure construction occurs in safe locations; (b) developing a flood early warning system (EWS) to enable
early action for protecting power and other critical infrastructure as well as vulnerable population—building on existing
sensors, forecasts, and modeling systems; and (c) establishing a robust institutional framework for DRFI, including the
formulation of a state DRFI strategy and conducting assessment of DRFI options such as insurance for private assets (e.g.,
housing) with incentives for retrofitting, livelihood protection instruments (e.g., for apple farmers), and state-level
sovereign risk transfers. One proposed instrument is a mechanism that increases insurance coverage and expands
insurability of homes, helping reduce the state's vulnerable housing stock. Pilot testing of selected financial products and
mechanisms will be undertaken in collaboration with private sector, based on the assessment results. Based on the sector
and instrument selected for pilots, this activity will include outreach and public awareness of insurance products and
capacity building for the public sector institutions on risk transfer.
17.      Component 2: Resilient Infrastructure and Livelihoods Recovery (Total: US$225.1 million; of which IBRD:
US$180.1 million; GoHP: US$45 million). This component will support the resilient recovery of key public services, namely:
transport (roads and bridges); public buildings; water, sanitation, and irrigation; and power supply, considering the impact
of climate change on hazard intensities and frequencies. Assets critical for service provision and sites with high risk will be
prioritized to develop best practices using innovative solutions. Hazard and risk analytics carried out under sub-component
1.1 as well as site-specific analyses will be carried out to ensure resilience to disasters including the effect of climate
change. Overall efforts under this component are expected to have a positive impact on livelihoods by reducing the impact
of future natural hazards exacerbated by climate change, protecting and creating jobs through value chain enhancements,
and ensuring continued access to transportation, water, and electricity.
18.      Sub-component 2.1: Resilient reconstruction of roads, bridges, and public buildings (Total: US$118.7 million; of
which IBRD: US$95 million; GoHP: US$23.7 million). This sub-component will support PWD to reconstruct and improve
priority transport corridors, including roads with requisite slope stabilization, drainage, culvert improvements, and road


                                                                                                                         Page 7
        The World Bank
        Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P513815)



safety considerations; bridges with erosion protection; bridle bridges; and critical public buildings such as hospitals,
schools, and multi-purpose relief shelters.
19.      Sub-component 2.2: Resilient reconstruction of water supply, sanitation, and irrigation (Total: US$59 million;
of which IBRD: US$47.2 million; GoHP: US$11.8 million). This sub-component will support reconstruction and
improvement of water supply, sewage/sanitation and irrigation schemes, to address damages and integrate resilience
considerations to ensure end-to-end functioning and service. Investments will be prioritized and designed using a system-
based approach to ensure that they: (a) are multi-hazard risk-informed both in terms of siting and design; (b) address the
full service chain – from intake to the end users; and (c) deliver measurable improvements in service quality, including
continuous water supply, enhanced monitoring, and effective water treatment.
20.     Sub-component 2.3: Resilient reconstruction of power supply infrastructure (Total: US$33.5 million; of which
IBRD: US$26.8 million; GoHP: US$6.7 million). This sub-component will focus on repairs, reconstruction, and other
interventions to restore and strengthen power supply, transmission, and distribution. This will be complemented by the
procurement of emergency power restoration systems to enable faster responses to future power disruptions. The sub-
component will also support the installation of 500 kilowatts solar power projects in 30 villages (panchayats) as part of
the “Green Panchayat” scheme, which is currently being piloted for 20 panchayats under the World Bank-financed
Himachal Pradesh Power Sector Development Program (P176032). This approach contributes to the decentralization of
power production and creation of system redundancies that ensure power supply in case of network disruptions.
21.      Sub-component 2.4: Resilient livelihoods (Total: US$13.9 million; of which IBRD: US$11.1 million; GoHP: US$2.8
million). This sub-component will strengthen existing and establish new value chains for resilient livelihoods in the farm,
non-farm, and rural tourism sectors across key business segments10 by targeting key bottlenecks. Technical Service
Agencies (TSA) will be contracted for the different business segments to support the overall process of end-to-end value
chain strengthening, starting with evaluations of the current products and services based on consumer interest.
Subsequently, the TSA will identify, design, and implement key interventions for each value chain including: (a)
establishing sustainable community business organizations (CBO) to organize artisans, producers, farmers, and service
providers (the formation of CBOs will leverage existing networks and groups from the State Rural Livelihoods Mission and
prioritize disaster-affected communities and areas); (b) providing technical support for product design, development,
innovation, and creation of strategic market linkages, while incorporating disaster risk considerations; (c) delivering
market-led trainings and skill upgrading to tailor products and services to consumer interest; (d) enhancing access to
finance; (e) facilitating participation in marketing and trade events; (f) building a pipeline of market orders for CBOs; (g)
supporting business continuity planning; and (h) strengthening disaster preparedness capacities. The value chain
development will also include a grant facility accessible to CBOs (not individuals) to finance critical activities such as
exposure visits, procurement of raw materials, and development of common facility centers, e.g., for production
processes, infrastructure improvements, product innovation etc.
22.     Component 3: Implementation Support (Total: US$24.5 million; of which IBRD: US$19.5 million; GoHP: US$5.05
million). This component will finance hiring of staff and consultants in the project management unit and project
implementation units, establishment of a procurement management information system, monitoring and evaluation
(M&E), communications, training, and facilitation of exchange and learning across the project and between the
implementing agencies. This includes support for Project Management and Technical Consultants (PMTC), who will


10 Kullu Weaves, Chamba Embroidery, Chamba Footwear, Pine Needle Crafts, Chamba Metal Crafts, Wool Products, Apple Products, Seabuckthorn

Berry Products, Turmeric Products, Hazelnut Products, Honey Products, and Community Based Tourism.

                                                                                                                                   Page 8
           The World Bank
           Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
           (P513815)



provide regional and global expertise to advise on tailored solutions, transfer of knowledge, and build capacity in
implementing agencies (IAs), particularly in the resilience cells.
1.




23.      Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million). This zero-cost component (no initial funding
allocation) enables rapid reallocation of funds from balances of other project components for emergency response and
recovery in case of an eligible crisis or emergency.

     E. Role of Partners
24.     The GoHP has expressed a strong interest in ensuring convergence across ongoing recovery and resilience
projects, including the ongoing Agence Française de Développement (AFD)-financed Disaster Risk Reduction and
Preparedness in Himachal Pradesh Project focused on strengthening of EWS. Collaboration is planned during the
implementation stage to complement AFD activities (yet to be defined in detail) to further enhance EWS and tailor
resulting information for decision support. Furthermore, the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure expressed
interest in partnering with READY-HP.

     F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
25.      The design of this project has benefited from the experiences of previous Emergency Recovery Loans in India;
sectoral engagements in Himachal Pradesh across water, power, roads, and horticulture as well as resilience-building
initiatives implemented in similar contexts worldwide. Specific lessons adopted include:
26.     Strong institutional mechanisms are critical for anchoring recovery operations. Experiences from disaster
recovery projects11 in Bihar, Odisha, and Uttarakhand demonstrate that empowering dedicated agencies with clear
mandates for coordination and ensuring convergence is essential for effective and timely disaster recovery across multiple
sectors. Accordingly, the Department of Revenue has been entrusted with that coordination role and avoiding duplication
across multiple sources of financing for recovery.
27.      Linking disaster recovery to long-term resilience ensures institutionalization of risk reduction measures.
Experience from the Resilient Kerala Program (P174778) exemplifies how integrating disaster recovery with broader
resilience building and development agendas through policy reforms, risk-informed planning, and dedicated financing
mechanisms can institutionalize lessons and drive a shift from reactive to proactive risk management. Building on this
approach, READY-HP has been designed to move beyond recovery and reconstruction, embedding long-term institutional
reforms to strengthen systemic resilience.
28.      Strategic procurement planning balances critical urgent needs with technically complex investments. Early
identification of contract packages, realistic timelines, and capacity building for implementing agencies can enable faster
delivery of urgent works while managing the complexities of large-scale, multi-sectoral investments. Accordingly, the
project has prioritized the preparation of a Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) that identifies the
packaging, appropriate procurement methods, and capacity building needs in advance, while responding to urgent post-
disaster needs.




11 Bihar Kosi Basin Development Project (P127725); Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868); and Uttarakhand Disaster Recovery Project

(P146653).

                                                                                                                                           Page 9
        The World Bank
        Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P513815)



29.     Integrated geohazard assessments are essential to infrastructure design in landslide prone Himalayan contexts.
The project will draw from the experience of Uttarakhand Disaster Recovery Project (P146653) and technical assistance
in Himachal Pradesh which underscores the importance of integrating detailed geohazard assessments using landslide
susceptibility mapping, remote sensing, and hydrometeorological data into the design and siting of infrastructure.
30.      Risk monitoring institutions need intensive technical engagement and dedicated human resources. READY-HP
will draw on lessons from the establishment of the Mathematical Modelling Center in Bihar and Hydro-Informatics Unit in
Assam to inform the design of the ‘resilience cells’ within infrastructure departments—particularly regarding the
application of international and national technical expertise and the development of sustainable models for staffing and
skill development.
31.      Providing comprehensive end-to-end technical support including business skills training, mentorship, market-
led insights, and access to finance to women-led businesses significantly increases job creation and livelihoods
resilience. The design of sub-component 2.4 builds on lessons from previous projects, which demonstrate that bundling
technical assistance (by combining skills training, strategic handholding, and financial support) significantly increases the
likelihood that women-led enterprises will expand, hire additional staff, and remain operational over time, even in
challenging environments.
32.      Sustained capacity building and strong institutional ownership are essential for the successful implementation
and sustainability of DRFI solutions in post-disaster contexts. Experiences with DRFI in the Pacific Islands, Indonesia, and
the Philippines highlight that providing technical assistance and training to government officials— especially in ministries
of finance and disaster management—is vital for understanding, designing, and uptake of DRFI instruments. Projects that
invest in building local capacity through workshops, executive education, and peer learning, enable governments to make
informed decisions, negotiate better insurance terms, and effectively integrate DRFI into public financial management
systems. READY-HP will adopt an approach that enables joint learning among diverse stakeholders and tailors financial
protection measures to the specific context of HP.

 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION
 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
33.     The project will be implemented by four IAs, a Project Management Unit (PMU) housed in the Disaster
Management Cell (DMC) in the Department of Revenue, along with three Project Implementation Units (PIUs), see
Figure 2. The PMU will be responsible for overseeing day-to-day operations, project management, coordination, and
reporting. In addition to its management role, the PMU will also serve as the implementation unit for the Disaster Risk
Management and livelihood activities under sub-components 1.2 and 2.4. Three PIUs in PWD, DoE12, and JSV will be
established within three months from loan effectiveness and will manage the recovery of critical transport corridors and
public buildings, power sector recovery, water sector recovery and allied irrigation, and sanitation work (sub-components
2.1, 2.2, and 2.3). The PIUs will also focus on institutional strengthening to ensure resilience and sustainability (sub-
component 1.1). The PIUs will be supported by field-level teams for implementing works at the intervention sites.
34.    To strengthen implementation capacity and facilitate knowledge transfer, PMTCs will support the PMU and
each PIU in technical assistance, financial management, procurement, environment and social management, resilience-


12 The PMU implementing the World Bank-funded Himachal Pradesh Power Sector Development Program (P176032) will also serve as the PIU for

READY-HP, hiring additional human resources and expertise as needed.

                                                                                                                                Page 10
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



focused design, quality assurance functions, capacity building, and M&E. PWD, JSV, and DoE will have each selected and
engaged the services of PMTC before loan effectiveness.




                                        Figure 2: Scheme of Implementation Arrangements

35.     Governance. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established within three months from loan effectiveness
to provide overall strategic direction, inter-departmental coordination, and formally approve or amend project
investments. Chaired by the Chief Secretary to GoHP, the PSC will comprise representatives from all relevant line
departments, including the Departments of Finance, Planning, Environment, and Social Welfare. Furthermore, a Project
Executive Committee, chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary of the Department of Revenue, will be established within
three months from loan effectiveness and will serve as the principal operational body responsible for overseeing and
supporting day-to-day implementation. It will assist the PMU with timely inter-agency coordination, regular decision-
making for issues below PSC level, ensure financial discipline, and compliance with the POM to be adopted not later than
three months after loan effectiveness.
36.      Implementation readiness. GoHP has notified the implementation arrangements through Government Orders,
namely, the formation of the PSC, Project Executive Committee, PMU, and PIUs. The PMU has on-boarded critical human
resources, and all PIUs have assigned nodal officials for critical functions. The PMU and PIUs are in advanced stages of
terms of reference development for their respective PMTCs with the aim of onboarding these agencies at the earliest.
Once the PMTCs are onboarded, the PIUs will focus on enhancing existing development project reports specifying
infrastructure interventions to adequately address natural hazards and ensure resilient reconstruction. Detailed proposals
for the livelihoods business segments are also under development.

 B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements
37.      The PMU will be responsible for M&E. The PIUs will support the PMU in collecting and reporting data for the
Results Framework and other data on all subcomponents, including: (a) social and environmental compliance; (b) technical
quality; (c) physical and financial progress; and (d) procurement compliance.
38.      The PIUs will establish a near real-time, geo-referenced monitoring system, while independent third-party
quality reviews will ensure transparency, compliance, and accountability throughout implementation and across the
project sub-components. The design of works will undergo independent technical review by accredited technical vetting
institutions to ensure resilience, innovation, compliance with code provisions, incorporation of global best practices, and
completeness with respect to the site-specific conditions of the state. The PIUs will adopt a two-tier supervision system

                                                                                                                   Page 11
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



for civil works — one at the PIU level and another at the field level. Supervision will be supported by a near real-time, geo-
referenced monitoring system developed in line with the project’s quality assurance and control guidelines. In addition,
independent third-party quality reviews will be conducted at each stage of project implementation to ensure
transparency, compliance, and accountability across all sub-components. Roads and bridges contracts will be monitored
and supervised using the Real-time electronic Project Monitoring System created under the World Bank-financed
Himachal Pradesh State Road Transformation Project (P163328). A comprehensive Results Framework and Monitoring
system has been prepared, detailing targets, definitions, and intermediate results indicators, and is included in the POM.
To facilitate the project’s learning agenda, comprehensive workshops will be organized at mid-term to extract lessons
learned and make necessary adjustments, and again at project closing to consolidate and finalize lessons.

 C. Disbursement Arrangements
39.    The disbursement method will be ‘reimbursement’ and will follow Investment Project Financing (IPF)
procedures. Reimbursement will be based on Quarterly Interim Unaudited Financial Reports submitted to the World Bank.
40.     The project will be eligible for retroactive financing for payments made prior to loan signing but on or after March
31, 2025, up to an aggregate amount not to exceed US$49 million of the loan for eligible expenditures on activities
included within the project’s scope, provided these are procured in accordance with the World Bank’s procurement
regulations.

 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY

 A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis
41.     The sustainability of the project will be ensured across the following dimensions:
        (a) Institutional: Capacity-building of government departments, technical staff, especially in the resilience cells,
            and field teams will strengthen institutional ownership and reduce reliance on external support. Community
            engagement and grievance redress mechanisms will promote local ownership and accountability, while
            alignment with state and national programs will enhance financial and operational sustainability. Embedding
            PIUs within existing departmental structures and involving resilience cells in project implementation,
            supported by PMTC, will further institutionalize project practices and ensure continuity beyond the project
            period.
        (b) Physical: All planned investments focus on the repair, reconstruction, and improvement of assets damaged
            during the monsoon season. To ensure resilience and sustainability, all site investigations will include risk
            assessments, along with geological and morphological studies as required to inform design. Finally, the PMTCs
            will support the PIUs in structuring effective operation and maintenance arrangements for the infrastructure
            works, including exploring possibilities for future coverage by catastrophe insurance.
        (c) Financial: The project will support the GoHP to quantify its contingent liabilities associated with disaster
            events, develop a DRFI strategy that adopts a risk layering approach, and support the piloting of a risk transfer
            mechanism. This will contribute to the GoHP’s financial stability by reducing the diversion of funds and fiscal
            burden caused by disasters.
42.    Paris Alignment. The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and
adaptation. It is also aligned with the GoI’s goals related to climate change as described in India’s Updated First Nationally


                                                                                                                      Page 12
        The World Bank
        Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P513815)



Determined Contributions 2021-2030 (2022), India's Long-Term Low-Carbon Development Strategy 202213, and the
Himachal Pradesh State Action Plan on Climate Change 2021-203014. With respect to mitigation, the GoI consistently
underscores its strong commitment to renewable energy and low-carbon development across official documents and
plans. With regards to adaptation, the GoI committed in the 2022 Nationally Determined Contributions to “better adapt
to climate change by enhancing investments in development programmes in sectors vulnerable to climate change,
particularly agriculture, water resources, Himalayan region, […] and disaster management”, India's Long-Term Low-Carbon
Development Strategy 2022 highlights the need for adaptation financing, and HP’s State Action Plan on Climate Change
2021-2030 lists sustainable eco-tourism expansion and sustainable water resource management while ensuring water
supply.
         (a) Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. Most project activities are not expected to result in a significant
             increase in greenhouse gas emissions and are considered Universally Aligned (UA). These include institutional
             and capacity-building activities (Component 1), rehabilitation of power generation, transmission, and
             distribution networks, and installation of solar photovoltaics (sub-component 2.3), resilient livelihood
             interventions (sub-component 2.4), project management support (Component 3). Rehabilitation of roads and
             bridges under sub-component 2.1 is UA, as no capacity expansion is foreseen. Water supply and sanitation
             investments under sub-component 2.2 are UA. Irrigation activities under the same sub-component present
             low mitigation risk and will ensure energy-efficient design and grid connection. The rehabilitation and
             strengthening of health and educational facilities and the construction of multi-purpose shelters present low
             mitigation risk. To mitigate this risk, these buildings will comply with national energy efficiency and building
             codes, be connected to the grid to avoid on-site fossil fuel use and integrate all technically feasible and
             economically viable energy-saving measures during design and construction. The installation of solar power
             plants in panchayats under the “Green Panchayat” scheme will contribute to the reduction of emissions, and
             the resilient recovery and rehabilitation of hydro power projects will ensure more reliable renewable energy.
         (b) Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. The project addresses key climate risks in Himachal Pradesh,
             including cloudbursts, floods, landslides, and GLOFs, exacerbated by climate change (see paragraph 5 for
             details), through a combination of institutional strengthening and resilient investments. Component 1
             (institutional strengthening) contributes to systemic climate resilience through floodplain zoning, early
             warning systems, and disaster risk financing instruments, as well as mainstreaming of resilience across
             departmental operations through the establishment of resilience cells. Sub-component 2.1 (recovery of roads,
             bridges, public buildings) addresses flood, landslides, and debris flow risks through the application of resilient
             design standards (e.g., improved drainage, scouring protection, slope stabilization). Sub-component 2.2
             (water, sanitation, irrigation systems) supports reliable service delivery by integrating flood, landslide and
             drought considerations into systems recovery. Sub-component 2.3 (power) focuses on resilient reconstruction
             and rehabilitation of hydropower plants and transmission/distribution networks considering floods and
             landslides, as well as the decentralization of power production and service security during hazard events
             through solar power plants in vulnerable panchayats. Sub-component 2.4 (livelihoods) enhances the resilience
             of value chains through business continuity planning, improved storage, and pest surveillance systems.
             Component 3 embeds adaptation in delivery systems through independent technical reviews. Component 4



13 Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India (2022). India’s long-term low-carbon development strategy.
14 Government of Himachal Pradesh, Department of Environment, Science and Technology: State Action Plan on Climate Change.


                                                                                                                                        Page 13
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



            provides contingency financing for post-disaster reconstruction in an eligible crisis or emergency, as needed,
            using climate-resilient standards, ensuring future-ready recovery.
43.      Climate co-benefits. The project is designed to strengthen infrastructure and livelihoods' resilience alongside
long-term institutional reforms for resilience building. It is expected to generate substantial climate co-benefits by
strengthening adaptation across multiple sectors while contributing modestly to mitigation. READY-HP supports resilient
reconstruction of roads, bridges, public buildings, water supply, sanitation, irrigation, and power infrastructure, all aimed
at reducing vulnerability to climate risks. It enhances institutional capacity through floodplain zoning, early warning
systems, and risk financing mechanisms, and further promotes climate risk‑informed planning and preparedness skills.
Mitigation co-benefits arise from the rehabilitation and installation of renewable energy infrastructure such as
hydropower and solar assets, contributing to cleaner energy systems. Overall, the project’s integrated design strengthens
resilience, reduces climate risk exposure, and advances resilient recovery pathways for Himachal Pradesh.
44.      Gender. Compared to the national average of 35.5 percent in India, the female labor force participation rate in
rural Himachal Pradesh is high at 62.4 percent, yet still significantly lower than male labor force participation rate at 78.8
percent. Of the employed women, 86.47 percent are vulnerably employed, which refers to lack of formal job arrangements
(e.g., self-employment or informal jobs), social protection, and safety nets, compared to 49.43 percent of the employed
men, resulting in higher levels of income instability. Himachal Pradesh’s traditional arts and small-scale agri-value chains
are crucial venues of female employment, including Kullu handloom, Chamba embroidery, sheep wool knits, organic
turmeric, and rural tourism where female participation exceeds 70 percent and women’s work forms the cultural and
economic backbone of rural communities. However, gender disparities persist, and women artisans and producers often
earn less than men in comparable roles and rarely hold decision-making or market-facing positions. Most operate
informally, without insurance or access to institutional credit, resulting in unstable incomes. In the handloom and
embroidery sectors, male traders and middlemen engage with the market, while in turmeric cultivation and homestay
tourism, women face barriers in marketing, digital access, and ownership of assets. These value chains, though central to
women’s local enterprise, remain structurally fragile—dependent on seasonal cycles, limited local demand, and vulnerable
to external shocks. As a result of those circumstances and the vulnerable employment status, women are especially
susceptible to impacts on their income when natural disasters strike, resulting from damaged livelihood assets, disrupted
access to markets, increased transport cost/time, loss of customers etc. In tourism dependent valleys such as Parvati and
Sainj in Kullu and Beas valley in Kangra, recurring disasters have led to evacuation of tourists and decline in homestay
occupancy rates as well as sales of craft items. Floods, landslides, and cloudbursts have repeatedly disrupted tourism
flows, destroyed weaving equipment, and damaged agricultural infrastructure. In the Kullu, Chamba, and Kangra valleys,
declining occupancy in homestays and cancelled fairs have cut women’s income significantly due to disaster events.
45.      To address the interlinked structural and disaster-induced vulnerabilities women face disproportionately, the
project will focus on targeted value chains to enhance livelihood resilience. With technical support from specialized TSAs,
activities will include: (i) forming and strengthening CBOs which are predominately women-led to improve bargaining
power and market access; (ii) providing market-led and risk-informed skill training with a focus on women’s enterprise
management; (iii) improving design, innovation, and product quality to enhance competitiveness of crafts and local agri-
products; (iv) facilitating access to finance through grants to CBOs formed under the project for facilitating innovations in
production, products, and market engagement to reduce vulnerability from income shocks; and (v) integrating business
continuity planning and disaster preparedness into business operations. These interventions will directly target barriers
limiting women’s economic mobility while ensuring that their enterprises can withstand climatic and hazard-induced


                                                                                                                      Page 14
      The World Bank
      Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
      (P513815)



disruptions and these outcomes will be captured in the results framework through the indicator: Women benefitting from
new or better jobs (target: 9,000).
46.     Citizen engagement. Citizen engagement will be integrated across multiple activities, and includes the following
approaches: (a) participatory planning and implementation of various livelihood initiatives under sub-component 2.4 such
as promoting local cuisine, revitalizing local art, strengthening ecotourism, and developing rural homestays, etc.; (b)
conducting household surveys, focal group discussions, and consultations; (c) responding to feedback and resolving
grievances raised by citizen through various grievance resolution platforms; (d) engaging a communications agency to
support end-to-end water and sanitation service delivery through infrastructure recovery; and (e) forming and
strengthening CBOs through capacity building to support community members to self-organize and to improve bargaining
power and market access. Citizen engagement will be captured in the results framework through the following indicators:
Community business organizations established, supported, and legally registered (target: 11); and Received grievances
that have been addressed within 21 days (target: 75 percent).
47.      The project is aligned with the World Bank Maximizing Finance for Development approach (MFD), contributes
to Private Capital Enabling (PCE), and private investment generated through the project is counted towards PCM.
        (a) The following sub-components are verified as MFD-enabling: Sub-component 1.1, Institutional Strengthening
            and Reforms of State Infrastructure Departments will support the creation of a more resilient institutional and
            regulatory environment including the establishment and operationalization of four resilience cells in
            infrastructure departments to mainstream risk information into the departments’ operations. Sub-
            component 1.2, Institutional Strengthening and Reforms at State level will contribute to the strengthening of
            risk-informed development planning and disaster resilience by updating development control regulations to
            integrate flood zoning and risk information, thereby reducing regulatory and locational risks for private
            investors. Sub-component 1.2 will also support the development of a comprehensive DRFI assessment and
            strategy, which will enable GoHP to secure pre-arranged financing, protect public budgets, and ensure a more
            predictable and timely response to disasters. The engagement with insurers, reinsurers, and financial
            institutions will create an enabling environment to engage in risk transfer solutions.
        (b) Sub-component 2.4, Resilient Livelihoods is verified as PCE, as it will strengthen existing product and service
            value chains and establish new value chains for resilient practices in the farm, non-farm, and rural tourism
            sectors. Interventions are expected to result in 12,000 people benefitting from new or better jobs (PDO
            indicator 3 – non-monetary), defined as new jobs or an income increase of at least 10 percent by project
            closing, which will enable private capital through income increase.
        (c) Sub-component 1.2 is also confirmed as PCM, as it will support the design of a disaster risk transfer model for
            sectors identified through the DRFI strategy and pilot selected financial products or mechanisms. Options
            discussed to date include insurance for private assets (e.g., housing) paired with incentives for retrofitting,
            solutions for the protection of livelihoods (e.g., for apple farmers or tourism sector), insurance of public
            infrastructure, or state-level sovereign covers. PCM of US$100 million is reflected in the results framework
            through the intermediate results indicator Sum insured, i.e., risk transferred to insurance and reinsurance




                                                                                                                   Page 15
        The World Bank
        Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P513815)



              companies (US$)15. This includes a preliminary estimate of the houses and horticulture cropped area to be
              insured in selected districts.
48.      Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted for the physical infrastructure components of the
project. The total project cost is expected to be US$406.25 million. The economic analysis quantifying the project benefits
focuses exclusively on the recovery investments under Component 2, which amount to about US$225.1 million, or
approximately 55.5 percent of the total project cost. At a 10 percent discount rate, the Net Present Value amounts to
US$114.21 million, generating an Economic Internal Rate of Return of 16 percent, in line with recent similar projects. The
primary project benefits are associated with increased resilience, as measured by the expected avoided losses from recent
and future extreme weather events, and include a reduction in disruptions of approximately 230,000 jobs in agriculture
and tourism. Moreover, Component 1 contributes important qualitative benefits related to institutional strengthening,
equipping key departments with technical expertise, ensuring long-term sustainability of the project’s resilience
investments. Component 3 enhances project delivery through continuous learning and capacity building. To ensure
robustness, sensitivity analysis was performed by varying key parameters. The project remains economically viable when
sensitivity analysis is conducted for increased costs (+20 percent), reduced benefits (-20 percent), and a combination of
both. As not all benefits under Component 2 could be quantified, including the project’s expected contribution to reducing
fatalities from extreme weather events, the quantified results presented in the economic analysis are considered to be
conservative, likely underestimating the actual benefits of the project.


 B. Fiduciary
49.     Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers,
dated February 2025 (Procurement Regulations) and the additional provisions stipulated in the Loan Agreement. The
World Bank’s “Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA
Credits and Grants”, dated October 15, 2006 and revised in January 2011 and as of July 1, 2016 (Anti-Corruption
Guidelines), and the provisions agreed in the Loan Agreement are also applicable. Based on the phase/period being
defined as ‘emergency’, certain need-based flexibility in the processes and procedures to expedite procurement will be
made available to the respective IAs.
50.    DMC, as a nodal agency, will have overall responsibility for ensuring compliance, consistency in procurement
process, and timely procurement reviews of contracts under the project. DMC, based on the finalized activities, agreed
arrangements and market sounding and readiness assessment, has prepared PPSD, to help define the overall strategy,
processes, procedures, and procurement arrangements and mitigation measures to be adopted.
51.      No large-value civil works contracts are anticipated, and no contracts are expected to involve International
Competitive Bidding. It was agreed that the IAs may use Government e-Marketplace (or Request for Quotations) for
activities below US$500,000 for which the mechanism is already defined in the PPSD. For activities over these thresholds,
the IAs will follow National Competitive Bidding (NCB) procedures unless agreed otherwise with the World Bank. The initial
Procurement Plan prescribes the applicable procurement arrangements, including applicable review thresholds and
methods, in line with the conditions agreed with the GoI related to National Competitive Procurement. The procurement




15 This indicator measures the estimated monetary value of assets at risk that have been transferred from the public and private sectors to financial

markets, compiled from product agreements and finance balance sheet data.

                                                                                                                                            Page 16
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



plan will be uploaded to the World Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system for the World
Bank’s prior concurrence. No activity is expected to exceed the NCB threshold for Goods or Works.
52.     While all four IAs have relevant experience, they lack specific knowledge in implementing IPFs. DoE and JSV are
executing World Bank-financed program-for-results operations and PWD staff have experience in procuring similar civil
works under GoI and State schemes; they have limited knowledge of IPFs. Furthermore, all the four IAs have experience
of World Bank-funded operations but since IPF-specific knowledge and experience are limited, all IAs will need to ensure
appointment of qualified procurement staff for implementation of the project by loan effectiveness.
53.       Procurement arrangements: (i) each IA will hire PMTCs with the required skill set to support the agencies in all
critical functions. In addition, all IAs will assign procurement staff to undergo procurement and STEP training; (ii) all IAs
will use the State e-procurement system for all procurement and use the agreed World Bank‘s Model Bidding or Standard
Request for Proposals Documents and ensure adherence to the National Procurement Procedures conditions defined in
the procurement plan and PPSD; (iii) Government eMarketplace may be used as per agreed arrangement protocol for
activities below thresholds mentioned above unless agreed otherwise; (iv) all procurement activities will be uploaded in
STEP and prior approved by the World Bank; (v) robust complaint redressal mechanism will be put in place by the nodal
agency; (vi) an information system to monitor procurements and contract management will be developed by the PMU
which will reflect the status of all activities and also help in analyzing procurement performance; (vii) all bidding
opportunities and awarded contracts will be disclosed on respective websites of the implementing agencies and/or project
webpage, or any appropriate medium; (viii) an independent annual procurement review will be carried out for the project
activities as per terms of reference agreed with the World Bank; (ix) an annual post review of certain percentage of
contracts will be conducted by the World Bank to review compliance and facilitate timely corrective actions; and (x) the
community level activities, if any, will be carried out as per the World Bank regulations. While the procurement activities
are not expected to exceed NCB threshold, the difficult geographic terrain and nature of emergency activities, limited
capacity of the implementing agencies, high-volume of civil work activities at decentralized level implemented by various
divisions, and community level activities pose procurement, oversight, and contract management challenges. The overall
residual procurement risk is assessed as Substantial.
54.    Financial management. A financial management (FM) assessment was carried out during October 13-16, 2025, in
accordance with the World Bank Policy and World Bank Directive on IPF. The FM arrangements described below are
considered sufficient for accounting and reporting project expenditure. Adequate FM arrangements will be in place within
three months of loan effectiveness, including the appointment of qualified financial management staff, as set forth in the
POM.
55.      Budgeting and planning. A specific budget head was created for READY-HP, with allocations planned for fiscal
year 2025–2026 and 2026–2027. IBRD loan proceeds and counterpart funding will be routed through the state budget to
the PMU and PIUs, under their designated Budget Heads within the departments' Demand for Grants. Distinct budget
lines will be established for the PMU and each PIU. PIUs will prepare Annual Work Plans to inform their budgets, which
the PMU will compile and submit for the Project Steering Committee approval. After approval, the budget will be
submitted by the PMU and PIU to their respective departments for inclusion in the state budget.
56.     Flow of funds. The state will prefinance expenses through its budget. Funds will be managed through Himachal
Pradesh’s HIMKOSH system, with PIUs and PMU submitting expenditures under a dedicated budget head for payment
processing. Payments will be processed online by the Drawing and Disbursement Officers designated for the project.



                                                                                                                     Page 17
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



57.    Accounting. The treasury system will provide online accounts for the project. Monthly and daily reports can be
generated from the system. Project accounts will be maintained on cash basis, in accordance with the government
accounting system. All payments will be made electronically through the state treasury system. Maximum payments will
be made using the online mode of payment. Each Drawing and Disbursement Officer will generate a printout of monthly
cash book from the system and keep a copy of vouchers for audit purposes.
58.    Financial reporting. Each PIU will compile expenditure details based on treasury records and share them with the
PMU. The PMU will prepare and consolidate Interim Unaudited Financial Reports for the project and submit them to the
World Bank within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
59.     Internal controls and regulations. All IAs will follow internal control frameworks in accordance with the HP
Financial Rules, Central Public Works Department Accounting Manuals, and other departmental guidelines. For the
envisioned grants in sub-component 2.4, specific FM arrangements will be documented in the Grant Manual, which will
be adopted by not later than three months from loan effectiveness. Grants will constitute a separate disbursement
category, for which adoption of the Grant Manual acceptable to the Bank will be a disbursement condition. A firm of
Chartered Accountants will be appointed by the PMU to conduct semi-annual internal audits covering the PMU and IAs,
in accordance with the terms of reference agreed with the World Bank. The PMU will share these audit reports with the
World Bank.
60.    External audit. The state office of the Comptroller and Auditor General will conduct the project audit annually, in
accordance with the terms of reference agreed with the World Bank. A consolidated Annual Financial Statement will be
prepared by the PMU and submitted to the Comptroller and Auditor General for audit. The audit reports need to be
submitted to the World Bank within nine months from the end of the financial year.
61.     Disbursement arrangements. The PMU will submit claims based on Interim Unaudited Financial Reports to the
Controller of Aid, Accounts and Audit for verification. Once verified, the Controller of Aid, Accounts and Audit will request
reimbursement from the World Bank. World Bank funds will flow from the GoI to the GoHP.
62.     Loan funds will be disbursed under the following categories as per the disbursement percentage indicated in Table
2.
                                                 Table 2: Disbursement Schedule

                                                                                              Percentage of expenditures
                                                            Amount of the loan allocated         to be financed by the
 Category
                                                                (Expressed in US$)                    World Bank
                                                                                                  (Inclusive of taxes)
 Goods, works, consulting, non-consulting services,
 trainings and workshops, and incremental                             233,262,500                      80 percent
 operating costs for the project
 Livelihood activities/Grants                                          11,125,000                      80 percent
 Emergency Expenditures                                                    0                           100 percent
 Front-end fee                                                          612,500




                                                                                                                     Page 18
         The World Bank
         Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh                        PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
         (P513815)



63.     Staffing. FM responsibilities will be handled by officers from the State Finance Services, designated as Financial
Management Specialists at the PMU and PIUs. They will be supported by consultants (qualified Chartered Accountants)
hired as part of the PMTCs. The PMU will ensure adequate staffing and periodic training.

 C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies
64.      Environmental risk rating is High due to significant potential for adverse environmental impacts stemming from:
(i) project’s geographic setting in a fragile disaster-prone mountainous terrain with ecologically sensitive areas/features;
(ii) nature of its infrastructure interventions; and (iii) limited familiarity/prior experience of the implementing agencies on
the application and implementation of risk management requirements of the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
Framework (ESF). Key environmental risks and impacts envisaged include: (i) mud/landslides, flooding, and soil erosion
leading to slope destabilization; (ii) clearing and disposal of excess waste materials, scrap, and debris without effective
sediment management resulting in safety issues of downstream population; (iii) disruption of services/usage of existing
infrastructure during recovery works of bridges, culverts, roads, water treatment plants, irrigation and sanitation,
electricity transmission/distribution lines, and buildings; (iv) occupational health and safety risks to workers, debris/waste
management, dust and noise during execution of reconstruction activities; and (v) limited capacity constraints to deal with
environmental and social (E&S) and occupational health and safety issues involving multiple implementing entities and
sub-projects in a fragile disaster-prone mountainous terrain.
65.      Social risk rating is High. As Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) will be undertaken during
project implementation, the social risks and impacts envisaged at this stage include: (i) taking of private land and assets
at certain locations for abovementioned works, permanent and temporary displacement; (ii) difficulty in identification of
owners as land parcels have either been washed away and/or damaged; (iii) impacts on livelihood due to land take,
restrictions on access to/use of forest land and resources, and also construction works that are likely to be prolonged in
duration; (iv) potential impacts on tribal groups in case they meet environmental and social standard (ESS) 7 criteria; (v)
risks relating to labor, labor influx, community health and safety, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment
(SEA/SH) risks as much of the construction labor is sourced from other states; (vi) possible exclusion of vulnerable groups
from such recovery efforts due to inadequate stakeholder engagement and communication; and (vii) lack of familiarity
and weak capacity of some of the PIUs. Associated facilities are not known at this stage and will need to be identified and
confirmed when undertaking ESIA during project implementation. As the lists of sub-projects are being finalized and
assessments will be undertaken later, the SEA/SH16 score is 11.5 and the SEA/SH rating is Moderate.
66.     Based on the above, ESS 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 10 are identified as relevant. At project appraisal, Stakeholder
Engagement Plan (SEP) and Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) have been prepared and disclosed17 on
the GoHP website on November 9, 2025, and on the World Bank’s external website on November 10, 2025. As stated in
the ESCP, the Environment and Social Management Framework, Labor Management Procedure, Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, and SEA/SH risk mitigation plan will be prepared within two
months of loan effectiveness and disclosed upon approval on the websites of the PMU and three PIUs. The ESCP lists the
following key commitments: (i) assigning a senior official as a E&S nodal officer in the PMU; (ii) preparation and

16 Using the rating tool for major civil works
17 Links to the ESCP and SEP disclosed on the GoHP website (https://hpsdma.nic.in/index1.aspx?lsid=9059&lev=2&lid=5415&langid=1) and on the

World Bank’s external website (ESCP: https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-
reports/documentdetail/099110925224035562 and SEP: https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-
reports/documentdetail/099110925224733961)

                                                                                                                                    Page 19
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



implementation of the aforementioned framework documents and assessment and mitigation plans; (iii) reporting of
incidents/accidents with prescribed timelines; (iv) operationalizing of Grievance Redressal Mechanisms, (v) for activities
considered under retroactive financing and for any identified associated facilities, conducting of due diligence to assess
compliance and development of corrective action plans, if required; and (vi) developing and implementing capacity
building action plan to develop capacity on various E&S aspects. An accessible grievance mechanism to receive and
facilitate resolution of concerns and grievances in relation to the project will be established and publicized before loan
effectiveness.
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                          Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                         Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                   No




 67.     Operational Policy 7.50, Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50) of the World Bank is applicable to this
 project because the project includes: (a) repair or rehabilitation of intake structures, retaining wall, rising main,
 protection work belonging to existing water supply schemes and irrigation schemes that were damaged due to flood or
 landslides; and (b) repair or rehabilitation of treatment systems and networks belonging to existing sewage/sanitation
 schemes, in the basins of four major rivers—Satluj , Beas, Chenab, and Yamuna, which form part of international
 waterways. The project’s repairs and rehabilitation activities qualify for an exception to the riparian notification
 requirement under paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50 as they meet the World Bank Policy’s four criteria for an exception. These
 activities will also not cause cumulative impacts, either upstream or downstream, as they are restorative in nature,
 without any additional intake or discharge compared to the pre-disaster situation. The exception to the notification
 requirement was approved by the Regional Vice President for the South Asia Region, World Bank, on November 17, 2025.


 68.     Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
 supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
 Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
 project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
 independent Accountability Mechanism. The Accountability Mechanism houses the Inspection Panel, which determines
 whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the
 Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints
 through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the Accountability Mechanism at any time after concerns
 have been brought directly to the attention of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity
 to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s GRS, visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For
 information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit
 https://accountability.worldbank.org.

 V. KEY RISKS


                                                                                                                  Page 20
       The World Bank
       Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



69.     The overall risk to achieving the PDO is Substantial. Technical design, institutional capacity for implementation
and sustainability, and fiduciary risks are rated Substantial, and environment and social risks are High.
70.      Technical design risk is Substantial. Disaster risk reduction in HP is challenging due to the complex terrain, and
the significant exposure of public assets and the population to extreme rainfall, landslides, and floods. Designing tailored,
effective yet cost-efficient solutions will require deep technical expertise and experience. In addition, due to the nature
of the project prepared in situation of urgent need, limited information is available for each of the selected intervention
sites, bearing the risk of unforeseen technical complexities during implementation. This risk will be mitigated by ensuring
highly experienced PMTCs are employed to guide the PIUs during project implementation, bringing in global and regional
best practices in geo-hazard risk assessments and mountain flood risk-informed designs for efficiently addressing risks
through tailored engineering solutions.
71.     Institutional capacity risk for implementation and sustainability is Substantial. While most implementing
agencies under the project have prior or ongoing experiences of implementing externally aided or disaster recovery
projects, READY-HP places additional demands on their capacities in the following ways: (i) intensive technical engagement
in designing risk-informed investments, (ii) implementing recovery efforts from multiple financing sources without
duplication, and (iii) undertaking institutional reforms for systemic change. These risks will be mitigated by ensuring that
PIUs are adequately staffed and supported by the hiring of capable technical agencies at the onset to guide the design of
investments and institutional reforms and the establishment of a high-level project steering committee to facilitate timely
decisions on institutional reforms.
72.     Fiduciary risk is Substantial. Procurement risk is Substantial due to the lack of prior experience among all
implementing agencies with World Bank-funded IPF projects. Additionally, the high volume of civil work activities to be
undertaken by PWD presents challenges related to compliance, consistency, and contract management, as well as
increased oversight risks and possible delays in fund flows. The risk will be mitigated through a range of measures,
including the onboarding of fiduciary personnel by all implementing agencies and the provision of targeted training. These
actions will complement the project’s overall fiduciary arrangements. Financial management risk is Substantial, primarily
due to the involvement of multiple implementing agencies and associated coordination complexities. These risks will be
mitigated through several measures, including ensuring timely availability of budgetary allocations, utilizing computerized
treasury systems for payments and accounting, deployment of dedicated finance staff across the PMU and PIUs, capacity
building through regular training and support, finalization and implementation of the Grant Manual for livelihood activities
to standardize and strengthen internal controls, and engaging audit firm for internal audit.
73.     Environment and Social risk is High. The environment and social risk rating is High due to risks and impacts
stemming from: (i) project’s geographic setting in a fragile disaster-prone mountainous terrain with ecologically sensitive
areas/features; (ii) lack of familiarity with World Bank’s ESF requirements and weak capacity of some of the PIUs; and (iii)
possible exclusion of vulnerable groups from such recovery efforts due to inadequate stakeholder engagement and
communication. Further information on these risks and mitigation measures will be identified through the ESIAs which
will be developed during implementation. In addition, project instruments such as the Environmental and Social
Management Plan, Resettlement Action Plan etc. will be prepared based on the Environmental and Social Management
Framework, RPF, SEP, and outline mitigation measures for the risks outlined above.




                                                                                                                     Page 21
       The World Bank
       Himachal Pradesh Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P513815)



                                                                        ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                                                                                   Closing Period
   Resilient disaster recovery supported
   People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people) CRI
   Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
   0                                                                                          2,350,400
     ➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
   0                                                                                          1,157,800
     ➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people) CRI

   Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
   0                                                                                          446,576
   State capacity for risk-informed development increased
   Line departments integrating resilience analytics into risk-informed decision making (Number)
   Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
   0                                                                                          4
   Livelihood resilience supported
   People benefiting from new or better jobs (Number)
   Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
   0                                                                                          12,000
     ➢Women benefiting from new or better jobs (Number)
   Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
   0                                                                                          9,000


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                                                                                  Closing Period




                                                                                                                                     Page 22


                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Himachal Pradesh Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    (P513815)


Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Reforms for Resilience
Resilience cells established and staffed (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                  Mar/2031
0                                                                                         4
Resilience guidelines for specific categories of infrastructure assets developed (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                  Mar/2031
0                                                                                         6
Flood modeling and zoning completed (Yes/No)
Oct/2025                                                                                  Mar/2031
No                                                                                        Yes
Development control regulations updated with reference to flood zoning (Yes/No)
Oct/2025                                                                                  Mar/2031
No                                                                                        Yes
Flood early warning system developed (Yes/No)
Oct/2025                                                                                  Mar/2031
No                                                                                        Yes
Disaster risk financing and insurance strategy developed (Yes/No)
Oct/2025                                                                                  Mar/2031
No                                                                                        Yes
Sum insured i.e., risk transferred to insurance and reinsurance companies (Amount(USD))
Oct/2025                                                                                  Mar/2031
0                                                                                         100,000,000
Component 2: Resilient Infrastructure and Livelihoods Recovery
People provided with at least basic water (Number of people) CRI
Oct/2025                                                                                  Mar/2031
0                                                                                         925,980
  ➢People provided with at least basic water - Female (Number of people) CRI
Oct/2025                                                                                  Mar/2031
0                                                                                         453,730
  ➢People provided with at least basic water - Youth (Number of people)     CRI

Oct/2025                                                                                  Mar/2031
0                                                                                         175,936
People provided with safely managed sanitation (Number of people) CRI



                                                                                                                              Page 23


                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Himachal Pradesh Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery                                                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    (P513815)


Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
0                                                                                          69,920
  ➢People provided with safely managed sanitation - Female (Number of people) CRI
Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
0                                                                                          34,260
  ➢People provided with safely managed sanitation - Youth (Number of people) CRI
Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
0                                                                                          13,284
Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (Number of people) CRI
Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
0                                                                                          1,282,000
  ➢Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services - Female (Number of people) CRI
Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
0                                                                                          628,180
  ➢Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services - Youth (Number of people) CRI
Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
0                                                                                          243,580
People benefitting from access to climate resilient electricity (Number of people)
Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
0                                                                                          52,500
  ➢People benefitting from access to climate resilient electricity - Female (Number of people)
Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
0                                                                                          25,725
  ➢People benefitting from access to climate resilient electricity - Youth (Number of people)
Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
0                                                                                          9,975
Roads rehabilitated/reconstructed (Kilometers)
Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
0                                                                                          160
Road bridges and footbridges rehabilitated/reconstructed (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
0                                                                                          276
Multi-purpose relief shelters built (Number)



                                                                                                                                                               Page 24


                                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Himachal Pradesh Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    (P513815)


Oct/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        10
Education and health facilities rehabilitated (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        30
Solar power plants installed in selected panchayats as part of the "Green Panchayat" scheme (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        30
Assets at hydroelectric projects rehabilitated and/or resilience enhanced (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        5
Transmission line emergency restoration systems available (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        3
Power transmission and distribution lines restored or strengthened for resilience (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        3
Water supply or sanitation/sewerage schemes rehabilitated/reconstructed for resilience (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        67
Temporary jobs created (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        800
Community business organizations established, supported and legally registered (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        11
People received skill training (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        12,000
New market-led products and services developed (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        114
Component 3: Implementation Support



                                                                                                                             Page 25


                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Himachal Pradesh Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery           PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    (P513815)


Received grievances that have been addressed within 21 days (Percentage)
                                                                           Mar/2031
                                                                           75
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response




                                                                                                            Page 26


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Himachal Pradesh Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
           (P513815)



  Monitoring and Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

Resilient disaster recovery supported
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people) CRI
                           This is a Corrporate Result Indicator (CRI). Measures the number of people benefitting from four types of resilient
                           infrastructure: 2,350,400 estimated as follows: (a) transport infrastructure (roads: 510,000; bridges: 730,000 ;
Description
                           footbridges: 42,000), (b) water and sanitation infrastructure (925,980 + 69,920), and (c) power infrastructure -power
                           supply (52,500); and (d) critical buildings (20,000).
Frequency                  Quarterly.
Data source                Progress reporting
                           a) Transport infrastructure: roads: 510,000; bridges: 730,000 ; footbridges: 42,000
                           b) Water and sanitation: 216,500 households connected to more resilient Water (201,300) and Sanitation (15,200)
                           schemes at 4.6 persons per household
Methodology for Data
                           c) Energy supply: 52,500 direct consumers of Himachal Pradesh State Electrcity Board Limited infrastructure that will be
Collection
                           rehablitation/ reconstructed
                           d) Buildings: emergency evacuation shelters: 1,750 at 250 capacity/shelter; hospitals at population of 3,000
                           people/hospital; schools: 1,966 as per reported occupancy of identified schools
Responsibility for Data
                           PIUs in PWD, JSV and DoE, aggregated by PMU.
Collection
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people) CRI
                           According to the 2011 Census females make up 49.26 percent of the population in Himachal Pradesh. This indicator will
Description
                           be calculated as percentage of the number of people benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure.
Frequency                  Same as parent indicator.
Data source                Same as parent indicator.
Methodology for Data Same as parent indicator.
Collection
Responsibility for Data Same as parent indicator.
Collection
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people) CRI
                           According to the 2011 Census of India, youth (here defined as individuals aged 15 to 24) make up about 19 percent of the
Description                population in Himachal Pradesh. This indicator will be calculated as percentage of the number of people benefiting from
                           climate resilient infrastructure.
Frequency                  Same as parent indicator.
Data source                Same as parent indicator.
Methodology for Data Same as parent indicator.
Collection
Responsibility for Data Same as parent indicator.
Collection
State capacities for risk-informed development increased
Line departments integrating resilience analytics into risk-informed decision making (Number)
                           Measures the utilization of resilience analytics produced by resilience cells to inform decision-making in the department,
Description
                           particularly for asset design.
Frequency                  Biannual.
Data source                Progress reports, study reports.
Methodology for Data A scoring methodology will be developed and detailed in the POM, including frequency of engagement with resilience
Collection                 cells, nature of resilience analytics, capacity building, and evidence of data driven decisions.
Responsibility for Data
                            PIUs in PWD, JSV, DoE, aggregated by PMU.
Collection
Livelihood Resilience strengthend



                                                                                                                                                Page 27
            The World Bank
            Himachal Pradesh Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
            (P513815)


People benefiting from new or better jobs (Number of people, disaggregated by gender) CRI GEN
                        Number of people with a new job or an increase in yearly income of at least 10 percent. This indicator captures the
Description
                        number of jobs supported by gender activities.
                        Once persons benefitting from the interventions are organized in the community business organizations, the baseline
                        data collection on income levels will be carried out. For persons joining later, the data collection information will be filled
Frequency
                        in upon joining.
                        Target will be assessed through data collection in last 6 months of the project.
Data source             Primary Data from Baseline and Endline data collection.
Methodology for Data
                        Baseline and Endline data collection using quantiative and qualitative methods.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                         PMU.
Collection


  Monitoring and Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components

  Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Reforms for Resilience
  Resilience cells established and staffed (Number)
  Description            Measures the official establishment of resilience cells in PWD, JSV, DoE and DMC and engagement of staff.
  Frequency              Biannual.
  Data source            Relevant Notifications, Progress reporting.
  Methodology for
                         Documentation and reporting by PIUs and PMU.
  Data Collection
  Responsibility for
                         PWD, JSV, DoE and DMC, aggregated by PMU.
  Data Collection
  Resilience guidelines for specific categories of infrastructure assets developed (Number)
                         Measures the number of guidelines that will be developed for resilience considerations in transportation, water and energy
  Description
                         infrastructure.
  Frequency              Biannual.
  Data source            Reporting from PWD, JSV and DoE; guidelines documents
  Methodology for
                         Documentation and reporting by PIUs and PMU.
  Data Collection
  Responsibility for
                         PWD, JSV and DoE, aggregated by PMU.
  Data Collection
  Flood modeling and zoning completed (Yes/No)
                         Measures the completion of flood modeling carried out by JSV and maps/documents provided in format as requested by
  Description
                         DMC.
  Frequency              Biannual.
  Data source            Completed documents.
  Methodology for
                         Progress reporting.
  Data Collection
  Responsibility for
                         JSV and PMU/DMC.
  Data Collection
  Development regulations updated with reference to flood zoning (Yes/No)
  Description            Measures the completion of the updating of development regulations document and the adoption by GoHP.
  Frequency              Biannual.
  Data source            Completed document.
  Methodology for
                         Progress reporting.
  Data Collection
  Responsibility for     PMU/DMC.


                                                                                                                                                  Page 28
         The World Bank
         Himachal Pradesh Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
         (P513815)


Data Collection
Flood early warning system developed (Yes/No)
Description            Measures completion of an expanded flood early warning system for hydroelectric projects and downstream population.
Frequency              Semiannual.
Data source            System users.
Methodology for
                       Reports, demonstration, and visits.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                        JSV and DMC
Data Collection
Disaster risk financing and insurance strategy developed (Yes/No)
Description            Measures the completion of the disaster risk financing and insurance strategy.
Frequency              Biannual.
Data source            Completed disaster risk financing and insurance strategy document.
Methodology for
                       Progress reporting.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                       PWD.
Data Collection
Sum insured, i.e., risk transferred to insurance and reinsurance companies (Amount(USD))
                       Measures the estimated monetary value of assets at risk that have been transferred from the public and private sectors to
Description
                       financial markets.
Frequency              Biannual.
Data source            Compiled from product agreements and finance balance sheet data.
Methodology for
                       Modelling and studies.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                       DMC/PMU.
Data Collection
Component 2: Resilient Infrastructure and Livelihoods Recovery
People provided with at least basic water (Number of people)
                        Measures the number of people benefitting from resilient infrastructure for water supply. 201,300 households are
                        connected to rehabilitated or reconstructed water supply schemes, at 4.6 persons per household, with access to at least
                        basic drinking water as defined by the Joint Monitoring Program.
                        Only households within the rehabilitated service area are counted. For schemes where rehabilitation is partial (limited to
Description
                        specific areas within zones or sources), only household connections within the rehabilitated service area that gain new
                        access or improved service will be counted; where the entire source or headworks is damaged and requires rehabilitation to
                        restore service or supply water to connections, all housheold connections linked to the rehabilitated source will be
                        counted.
Frequency               Quarterly.
Data source             Progress reporting and JSV’s M&E system.
Methodology for
                        Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                        PIU in JSV
Data Collection
People provided with safely managed sanitation (Number of people)
                       Measures the number of people benefitting from resilient infrastructure for sanitation. 15,200 households are connected to
                       rehabilitated or reconstructed sanitation schemes, at 4.6 persons per household, with access to safely managed sanitation as
                       defined by the Joint Monitoring Program. For schemes where rehabilitation is partial (limited to specific areas within a zone
Description
                       or safely managed treatment facility), only household connections within the rehabilitated service area that gain new access
                       or improved service will be counted; where the entire safely managed treatment facility is damaged and requires
                       rehabilitation to restore service, all households linked to the rehabilitated safely managed treatment facility will be counted.
Frequency              Quarterly.


                                                                                                                                               Page 29
         The World Bank
         Himachal Pradesh Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
         (P513815)


Data source           Progress reporting and JSV’s M&E system.
Methodology for
                      Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      PIU in JSV
Data Collection
Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (Number of people)
                      Measures the number of people benefitting from roads and bridges reconstruction. Sustainable transport is defined as the
Description           provision of improved transport services and infrastructure for mobility in a manner that is safer, more accessible, more
                      efficient, and more resilient, while minimizing carbon and other emissions and environmental impacts.
Frequency             Quarterly.
Data source           Progress reporting and PWD’s M&E system
Methodology for
                      Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      PIU in PWD
Data Collection
People benefitting from climate access to climate resilient electricity
Description           Measures the number of people benefitting from the reconstrution of HEPs, energy assets and green panchayats.
Frequency             Quarterly.
Data source           Progress reporting and DoE’s M&E system
Methodology for
                      Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      PIU in DoE
Data Collection
Roads rehabilitated/reconstructed (Kilometers)
Description           Measures the completed kilometers of roads, including slope stabilization and drainage where required.
Frequency             Biannual.
Data source           Site visit and implementation progress reports.
Methodology for
                      Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      PWD.
Data Collection
Road bridges and footbridges rehabilitated/reconstructed (Number)
Description           Measures the number of completed road bridges and footbridges, including scouring protection where required.
Frequency             Biannual.
Data source           Site visit and implementation progress reports.
Methodology for
                      Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      PWD.
Data Collection
Multi-purpose relief shelters built (Number)
Description           Measures the number of completed multi-purpose relief shelters.
Frequency             Biannual.
Data source           Site visit and implementation progress reports.
Methodology for
                      Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      PWD.
Data Collection
Education and health facilities rehabilitated (Number)
Description           Measures the number of education and health facilities for which all planned interventions were completed.



                                                                                                                                          Page 30
         The World Bank
         Himachal Pradesh Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
         (P513815)


Frequency            Biannual.
Data source          Site visit and implementation progress reports.
Methodology for
                     Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                     PWD.
Data Collection
Solar power plants installed in selected panchayats as part of the "Green Panchayat" scheme (Number)
Description          Measures the number of completed installations of solar power plants at the panchayat level
Frequency            Biannual.
Data source          Site visit and implementation progress reports.
Methodology for
                     Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                     DoE.
Data Collection
Hydroelectric projects rehabilitated and/or resilience enhanced (Number)
                     Measures the number of hydroelectric projects at which all planned interventions at the power houses and other assets have
Description
                     been completed.
Frequency            Biannual.
Data source          Site visit and implementation progress reports.
Methodology for
                     Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                     DoE.
Data Collection
Transmission line emergency restoration systems available (Number)
Description          Measures the completed purchase of emergency restoration systems.
Frequency            Biannual.
Data source          Documentation of receipt of emergency restoration systems.
Methodology for
                     Progress reporting.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                     DoE.
Data Collection
Power transmission and distribution lines restored and strengthened for resilience (Number)
                     Measures the number of power transmission towers for which planned interventions have been completed and transmission
Description
                     is operational.
Frequency            Biannual.
Data source          Site visit and implementation progress reports.
Methodology for
                     Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                     DoE.
Data Collection
Water supply or sanitation/sewerage schemes rehabilitated/ reconstructed (Number)
Description          Measures the number of water supply schemes for which all planned interventions have been completed
Frequency            Biannual.
Data source          Site visit and implementation progress reports.
Methodology for
                     Site visits and revision of progress reports.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                     JSV.
Data Collection
Temporary jobs created (Number)



                                                                                                                                        Page 31
         The World Bank
         Himachal Pradesh Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
         (P513815)


                     Measures the individuals employed in the reconstruction and/or maintenance of resilient infrastructure assets under the
Description
                     project.
Frequency            Biannual.
Data source          Progress reporting from construction firms including labor and employment documentation.
Methodology for
                      Revision of labor and employment documentation.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      PWD, JSV, DoE and DMC, aggregated by PMU.
Data Collection
Community business organizations established, supported and legally registered (Number)
                      Measures the number of groups established and supported for specific products or services. This includes support to
Description           organize community members into CBOs, followed by capacity buidling to support the effective governance, administration
                      and market access of CBOs.
Frequency             Biannual.
Data source           Technical service consultant.
Methodology for       Compilation of legal documents proofing the existence of the companies. (Total 11 estimated as follows: nonfarm CBOs: total
Data Collection       6; farm based CBOs: 3; Horticulture based CBOs: 2)
Responsibility for
                      PMU.
Data Collection
People received skill training (Number)
Description           Measures the number of people participating in targeted trainings that enhance the skill for a craft, product or service
Frequency             Semiannual.
Data source           Participant lists.
Methodology for
                      Signing in of all participants at each training.
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      PMU.
Data Collection
New market-led products and services developed (Number)
Description           Measures the number of products newly developed or enhanced.
Frequency             Semiannual.
Data source           Progress report from technical service consultant.
                      Listing provided by each of the community businesses organizations. (Total 114 estimated as follows: nonfarm products amd
Methodology for
                      services: total 60; farm based products amd services: 30; Horticulture based products amd services: 14; tourism
Data Collection
                      establishments100)
Responsibility for
                      PMU.
Data Collection
Component 3: Implementation Support
Received grievances that have been addressed within 21 days (Percentage)CE
Description           Measures the share of project-related grievances resolved satisfactorily.
Frequency             Semiannual.
Data source           Project Grieveance Redressal Mechanism.
Methodology for       Exported reports of received grievances, including if they were actual grievances or other requests (e.g., requests for
Data Collection       information) and if they have been resolved according to the underlying mechanism.
Responsibility for
                      PMU.
Data Collection
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response




                                                                                                                                         Page 32
