Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Vanuatu: Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - First Phase (P513248)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Apr-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01609




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Vanuatu: Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - First Phase (P513248)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                                                    Vanuatu: Pacific Islands
                          Vanuatu                        EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC        P513248                       Regional Oceanscape
                                                                                                                    Program - First Phase
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                                                                                                                    Environment, Natural
                          Investment Project
                                                         24-Apr-2026                  05-Jun-2026                   Resources & the Blue
                          Financing (IPF)
                                                                                                                    Economy
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Ministry of Fisheries,
                          Republic of Vanuatu            Oceans, and Maritime




_For Official Use Only_
                                                         Affairs (MFOMA)

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          The Development Objective of the Series of Projects (SoP) is to strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific
                          Island oceanic and coastal fisheries, and the critical habitats upon which they depend.

                          The Development Objective of this Project is to improve access to economic opportunities for fishers and fish workers,
                          increase climate-resilient domestic supply of fish products, and strengthen national capacity for fisheries
                          management.

                          Components
                          Tuna industry domestication
                          Small- and medium-sized fisheries value chain development
                          Fisheries governance and institutions strengthening
                          Project Management

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

                          SUMMARY


                                                                                                                                               Page 1
                                  The World Bank
                                  Vanuatu: Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - First Phase (P513248)



                               Total Operation Cost                                                                                           45.00

                               Total Financing                                                                                                45.00
                                         of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                    40.00
                               Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00

                           DETAILS
                               World Bank Group Financing
                                International Development Association (IDA)                                                                   40.00
                                  IDA Grant                                                                                                   40.00
                               Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                Trust Funds                                                                                                     5.00
                                  PROBLUE MDTF                                                                                                  5.00




_For Official Use Only_
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@ffiprocessing#doctemplate

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial


                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                           Other Decision (as needed)

                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context
                          1.      The Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) region includes 22 small island countries, dispersed over a large
                          ocean space, with common development challenges related to small economies, limited resources, remoteness,
                          dispersed population, and high exposure and vulnerability to external economic shocks, climate change and natural
                          hazards. Many Pacific Islanders live in poverty, and the region has many fragile states. While their landmass may be small,
                          the ocean space under the sovereign rights of the Pacific Islands countries (PICs) is of vast expanse – often referred to as
                          the ‘Blue Pacific continent’.
                          2.       The small island nation of Vanuatu consists of 83 islands and has been described as a large ocean State with 98


                                                                                                                                                  Page 2
                                   The World Bank
                                   Vanuatu: Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - First Phase (P513248)


                          percent of its territory covered by ocean. Vanuatu has experienced political instability and delays in delivery of public
                          assets and services due to low public expenditure. Vanuatu’s economy is driven by tourism, agriculture, fisheries, and
                          subsistence activities outside the main urban centers of Port Vila and Luganville. The fisheries sector is pivotal to the
                          nation’s economy by contributing 14 percent of the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2021,1 and supporting
                          nutrition and food security.2
                          3.      Vanuatu is one of the most climate-vulnerable and disaster-prone countries in the world, facing escalating
                          threats from extreme weather events in a changing climate.3 The country anticipates 2-3 cyclones each year, costing up
                          to 64 percent of the country’s GDP in extreme cases.4 Located in one of the most seismically active zones of the world and
                          on a tectonic belt with multiple active volcanoes, Vanuatu is exposed to extreme risks from earthquakes and volcanic
                          eruptions. In December 2024, a 7.3-magnitude earthquake caused loss of life and extensive damage to infrastructure in
                          the capital city, Port Vila, with direct economic losses to physical assets, including buildings, roads, bridges, estimated at
                          US$197 million – equivalent to 17 percent of the country’s GDP.5 Around two-thirds of the population lives along the
                          coastline, exposing them to risks from sea level rise, storm surges, floods and tsunamis.
                           Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          4.      Regional sector context. Fisheries serve as a cornerstone of the economies of PICs, crucial for food security,
                          nutrition, jobs, livelihoods, and public revenues. The WCPO is the only ocean without overfished tuna stocks and no
                          overfishing owing to robust conservation and management measures (CMMs) implemented through collaborative efforts




_For Official Use Only_
                          among PICs and regional organizations such as the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC), the Forum
                          Fisheries Agency (FFA), the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA) and the Pacific Community (SPC). The resulting
                          productivity of the WCPO tuna fisheries makes it globally significant, accounting for about 60 percent of the global tuna
                          production. Despite significant tuna-related economic activity in the WCPO, much of the value chain benefits continue to
                          escape the PICs, limiting their full domestic economic potential.6
                          5.      National tuna value chain context. Vanuatu’s regional advantage to develop a national processing industry
                          includes access to high value tuna species destined for premium products sought after in high-end markets, a low-cost
                          labor pool, existing streamlined electronic single window system for trade facilitation, and a conducive geographic location
                          with increasing market connectivity. Processing in Vanuatu’s commercial tuna value chain is currently limited to
                          operations carried out by Sino-van, a joint venture between the China National Fisheries Corporation (CNFC) and the
                          Vanuatu government. Vanuatu is looking to implement regulatory and licensing changes that would mandate increased
                          landings once other critical components – such as landing infrastructure and associated port services have been put in
                          place.
                          6.       At present, the main limitations for attracting greater investment into the tuna sector are inadequate landing
                          infrastructure and supporting services. Lack of infrastructure also includes commercial slipway (or drydock) facilities, with
                          Suva, Fiji, being the closest port for regular vessel servicing. The Government of Vanuatu identified Luganville, on Espiritu
                          Santo Island, as an ideal site for establishing an international fishing port, also aligning with government objectives to
                          establish an economic hub in Vanuatu’s second most populous town. Santo offers a strategic location to fishing grounds,
                          weekly air connectivity to Australia and other islands, and planned air connectivity to major markets like China, Dubai, and


                          1 Gillett R. and Fong M. 2023. Fisheries in the economies of Pacific Island countries and territories (Benefish Study 4). Noumea, New Caledonia: Pacific Community.

                          704 p. https://purl.org/spc/digilib/doc/ppizh
                          2 Bell, J. D., Kronen, M., Vunisea, A., et al. (2009). Planning the use of fish for food security in the Pacific. Marine Policy, 33(1), 64-76.

                          3 Climate Risk Country Profile: Vanuatu (2021): The World Bank Group.
                          4 Refer to Tropical Cyclone Pam, 2015. https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/infographic-cyclone-pam.pdf.
                          5 World Bank; Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). 2025. Global Rapid Post-Disaster Damage Estimation (GRADE) Report: The December 17,

                          2024 Mw 7.3 Earthquake in Port Vila, Vanuatu.
                          6Calculated based on WCPF and country reporting.




                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3
                                   The World Bank
                                   Vanuatu: Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - First Phase (P513248)


                          Singapore. Santo has further been identified as high-potential for a new dry-dock investment with facilitation from the
                          International Finance Corporation (IFC), offering synergies for vessel servicing operations and increasing the attractiveness
                          of the location to vessel operators.
                          7.       In addition to the oceanic tuna fisheries, Vanuatu also has coastal fisheries which are integral to food and
                          nutrition security, subsistence livelihoods, and local economies, with an estimated 40 percent of households
                          participating in fishing activities, half of which fish for commercial purposes. Unfortunately, despite the importance of
                          coastal fisheries, very little information is available and research is very outdated. The lack of information and robust
                          monitoring systems makes resource management very challenging and is leading to nearshore overfishing and resource
                          depletion, raising food security risks and threatening subsistence livelihoods and local economies. Food supply and
                          revenues from coastal fishing are expected to decline due to reduced productivity from sea temperature rise and ocean
                          acidification in most IPCC scenarios.
                          8.      The Project responds to the priorities established in the WBG Small States Strategy and the Regional Partnership
                          Framework (RPF) for the nine Pacific Island Countries (FY2026–2031). This Project is also aligned with the Government
                          of Vanuatu (GoV)’s vision for the transformation of the fisheries sector rooted in the National Development Plan 2016-
                          2030 (NSDP), the Policy Directives for the Next 100 Days issued in February 2025 by the new GoV, and the National
                          Fisheries Sector Policy 2016-2031 (NFSP), particularly its strategic goals for institutional strengthening and good
                          governance; fisheries investment to increase economic growth and food security; infrastructure development; and
                          enhancing fisheries compliance and illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing prevention.




_For Official Use Only_
                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           The Development Objective of the Series of Projects (SoP) is to strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific
                           Island oceanic and coastal fisheries, and the critical habitats upon which they depend.

                           The Development Objective of this Project is to improve access to economic opportunities for fishers and fish
                           workers, increase climate-resilient domestic supply of fish products, and strengthen national capacity for fisheries
                           management.

                               Key Results

                          9.      At the core of the sector transformation are three long-term outcomes: (i) improved economic opportunities
                          created through tuna industry domestication resulting in agribusiness development and jobs in Vanuatu; (ii) increased
                          climate-resilient domestic supply of fish achieved through development of domestic fisheries value chains; and (iii)
                          improved fisheries governance through a strengthened fisheries administration.
                               D. Project Description
                          10.     The Project responds to the GoV’s request for an investment aiming to transform the fisheries sector. Sector
                          transformation requires a long-term perspective and successive investment phases with increasing private sector
                          participation over time. Considering the scale and complexity of investments needed to drive sector transformation,
                          successive operations via multiple phases are envisaged, with increased coordination with the International Finance
                          Corporation (IFC).
                          11.      This first phase project will focus on no-regret, public-sector-financed enabling infrastructure, strengthening of
                          institutions and policies, and preparation of a pipeline of skilled workers needed for developing a fisheries hub that

                                                                                                                                                   Page 4
                                 The World Bank
                                 Vanuatu: Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - First Phase (P513248)


                          provides for dock-side inspections, offloading, and transshipment. In the medium term (second and third phases),
                          investments will target value adding to tuna on the island of Espiritu Santo – a priority development location identified by
                          the GoV. The Project will be part of the existing Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program (PROP) Series of Projects
                          (SOP).
                          12.      Component 1: Tuna industry domestication. This Component includes development of enabling public
                          infrastructure in Luganville, Espritu Santo, to increase domestic benefits and value capture from industrial tuna fishing
                          fleets operating in Vanuatu’s waters.
                          13.      Subcomponent 1.1. Investing in enabling public infrastructure for tuna industry domestication. The planned
                          climate and disaster-resilient facilities will address a gap in existing fisheries port infrastructure in Vanuatu by offering a
                          one-stop shop for efficient dockside inspections and administrative functions, facilities for dockside offloading, services to
                          fleets, and facilitation of transshipment. The proposed multipurpose piled jetty will be complemented with associated
                          onshore facilities, including a boatyard pen and gantry for boat maintenance, and an administrative office building that
                          accommodates fisheries inspections, customs service, immigrations, seafood certification, and other administrative
                          fishing port functions. In addition, a collaborative industrial incubator for seafood handling and processing will be
                          established on site.
                          14.      Subcomponent 1.2. Developing a workforce for a national fisheries and seafood industry. Infrastructure
                          investments will be coupled with professionalization of a local workforce. The Vanuatu Maritime and Fisheries Institute




_For Official Use Only_
                          (VMFI) offers an established facility for delivery of vocational training, and the curriculum will be modernized and
                          diversified and accredited through the Vanuatu Qualifications Authority (VQA).
                          15.     Component 2: Small- and medium-sized fisheries value chain development. This component will create
                          conditions to develop small- and medium-sized domestic fisheries operations to increase domestic supply of fish for food
                          security and nutritious protein supply.
                          16.      Subcomponent 2.1. Investing in domestic fisheries value chains. Investments will focus on formalizing fisher
                          groups and developing a spoke-and-hub cold chain system, including upgrades for the Luganville provincial fish market.
                          Parallel investments on medium-scale vessel development are aimed to facilitate offshore movement of fishers, including
                          construction of two demonstration vessel prototypes and related boat trials.
                          17.    Subcomponent 2.2. Informing domestic fisheries value chain management and development. The project will
                          support the development of a pragmatic sampling and statistical extrapolation framework leveraging census and
                          household surveys.
                          18.      Component 3: Fisheries governance and institutions’ strengthening. The component aims to enhance Vanuatu's
                          fisheries sector by reinforcing fisheries governance, supporting policy and regulatory review and strengthening the
                          institutional capacity of VFD, including through design and construction of new VFD headquarters.
                          19.     Subcomponent 3.1. Adequate working environment. The project will support the design and construction of a
                          new climate-resilient, low-emission and cyclone and seismic-resistant headquarters building for VFD in Port Vila.
                          20.    Subcomponent 3.2. Capacity building and institutional strengthening. The project will support capacity for the
                          government to manage Electronic Monitoring (EM) and Electronic Reporting (ER) systems through training, software and
                          hardware.
                          21.      Subcomponent 3.3. Policy framework. The project will support the development of sector vision, interministerial
                          training on understanding of fisheries sector, and the policy/regulatory framework for the management of medium and
                          small scale fisheries.
                          22.     Component 4: Project management. This component covers the staffing of the Project Support Team (PST),


                                                                                                                                                    Page 5
                                 The World Bank
                                 Vanuatu: Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - First Phase (P513248)


                          procurement of necessary equipment and software, and operational costs.
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

                          23.      The Project combines technical assistance with targeted physical investments to strengthen fisheries governance,
                          improve climate‑resilient domestic fish supply, and expand fisheries value chains. Physical investments are concentrated
                          in Luganville (Espiritu Santo)—including coastal reclamation, a multipurpose jetty with moorings, and associated fisheries
                          and commercialization facilities—and construction of a new Vanuatu Fisheries Department (VFD) headquarters in Port
                          Vila, supported by nationwide technical assistance. Given the scale and nature of coastal and marine works, the sensitivity
                          of the receiving environment, potential land and marine access impacts, and institutional capacity constraints, the Project
                          is assessed as having Substantial environmental and social risk.
                          24.     Environmental risks are primarily associated with coastal reclamation and marine infrastructure development.




_For Official Use Only_
                          These activities will permanently occupy and modify foreshore and seabed areas and may result in localized changes to
                          coastal processes, sediment dynamics, and water quality during construction. While capital dredging is not anticipated,
                          risks related to sediment disturbance, erosion, dewatering, and accidental pollution remain and require careful
                          management.
                          25.      Biodiversity risks are material due to the Project’s location within the broader Palekula–Turtle Bay Special, Unique
                          Marine Area (SUMA), a marine setting of high ecological value supporting species of conservation concern. Although the
                          direct footprint is largely within modified areas, indirect and cumulative impact pathways exist, including from turbidity,
                          underwater noise and vibration, light spill, pollution risks, and increased vessel movements during operation.
                          26.      Pollution risks arise during construction from waste generation, runoff, and spill risks, and during operation from
                          fuel storage and handling, vessel servicing, stormwater discharge, and wastewater and organic waste from port and fish
                          handling facilities. The absence of a reticulated sewerage system at the Luganville site heightens the importance of
                          appropriately designed onsite wastewater treatment and GIIP‑aligned waste and spill management systems suitable for
                          a marine receiving environment.
                          27.       Social risks are significant. Coastal reclamation and associated infrastructure may result in temporary or
                          permanent restrictions on access to foreshore and marine areas used informally or under customary tenure, with potential
                          livelihood implications. Construction and operation will generate community health and safety risks related to noise, dust,
                          traffic, and increased marine and road activity, as well as life and fire safety risks for buildings accessed by workers and
                          the public.
                          28.     Labor‑related risks include occupational health and safety hazards associated with marine and coastal
                          construction and fisheries operations, and labor influx risks during construction. Without effective management, labor
                          influx may exacerbate pressure on local services and elevate risks of Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment (SEA/SH),
                          particularly given existing vulnerabilities and capacity constraints.
                          29.    During operation, changes in fisheries infrastructure and value chain dynamics may affect small‑scale fishers,
                          aquaculture producers, and market actors. There is a risk that benefits may not be equitably distributed, or that women
                          and other vulnerable groups may be excluded if inclusive design and implementation measures are not applied.

                                                                                                                                                   Page 6
                                   The World Bank
                                   Vanuatu: Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - First Phase (P513248)


                          30.      Climate change and natural hazard risks are significant for coastal and reclaimed land infrastructure, including
                          exposure to cyclones, earthquakes, storm surge, and sea‑level rise. Site‑specific geotechnical investigations and
                          climate‑resilient design measures are therefore critical to ensure asset integrity and avoid secondary environmental and
                          social impacts.
                          31.     Technical assistance activities also carry downstream environmental and social risks if policies, systems, or training
                          inadvertently promote environmentally harmful practices or exclude vulnerable groups. All technical assistance will
                          therefore be screened and structured to align with the Environmental and Social Standards and promote inclusive and
                          sustainable sector outcomes.
                           E. Implementation
                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          32.    MFOMA will be the implementing agency. VFD, within MFOMA, will be responsible for technical Project
                          implementation. A Project-financed Project Support Team (PST) will assist MFOMA with management and reporting
                          responsibilities for the proposed Project.
                          33.     Project governance, oversight and interagency coordination will be led by the MFOMA DG, with accountability
                          oversight from Ministry of Finance and Economic Management (MFEM), and an Interministerial Coordination
                          Committee for advisory and coordination support. The latter will be composed of representatives from MFOMA, MFEM,




_For Official Use Only_
                          Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Utilities (MIPU), Ministry of Trade and Commerce (MTC), Ministry of Internal Affairs
                          (MIA), Ministry of Climate Change and Adaptation (MCCA), and Ministry of Education and Training (MET).
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                                Nina Doetinchem
                                Senior Environmental Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            Republic of Vanuatu

                           Implementing Agencies
                            Ministry of Fisheries, Oceans, and Maritime Affairs (MFOMA)

                            FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                           The World Bank
                           1818 H Street, NW
                           Washington, D.C. 20433
                           Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                           Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate


                                                                                                                                                   Page 7
                               The World Bank
                               Vanuatu: Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - First Phase (P513248)


                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                    Nina Doetinchem

                          Co- Team Leader(s):                     Xavier F. P. Vincent

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:               Marc Peter Sadler                       09-Apr-2026

                          Country/Division Director:              Han Fraeters                            24-Apr-2026




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                        Page 8
