Public Disclosure Authorized
                                           DRAFT January 15, 2026




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                      STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN




                                   Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB):
                               Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters
                                                 (P513349)




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                     1


                                                                              Confidential
1.    Introduction/Project Description

1.1      The Cubango-Okavango River Basin is a transboundary basin with a network of river
         systems traversing through Angola, Botswana and Namibia. It comprises of a network
         of rivers whose headwaters are in the Angolan highlands where the Cuito and Cubango
         Rivers originate. The topographic extent of the CORB is approximately 700,000 km2, but
         derives its principal flow from 120,000 km2 of sub-humid and semi-arid rangeland in the
         Cuando Cubango Province of Angola. The Cubango-Okavango stretches for
         approximately 1,100 kms and is drained by the Cubango (referred to as Kavango in
         Namibia and Okavango in Botswana). The Cubango-Okavango River forms the boundary
         of Namibia and Angola, and on this stretch is joined by the main tributary, the Cuito,
         before flowing through the panhandle as it enters Botswana and spilling into the
         Okavango Delta in Botswana.

1.2      The basin supports predominantly rural communities most often located either adjacent
         to the river or along roads. Relative to capital cities and main centres of economic
         activity, the basin populations of these countries are remote; this is reflected in lower
         social development indicators in the basin than those for national social development.
         In general, the people of the basin are poorer, less healthy, and less educated than other
         groups in their respective countries. This is particularly the case in Angola where war
         curtailed social and economic development. Fortunately, the riparian countries
         recognize that economic and social development within the basin is essential for
         improvement of socio-economic status and livelihoods of communities within the basin.

1.3      The CORB is internationally important for its biodiversity and biological productivity. The
         Okavango Delta is the best-known feature of the CORB. It is one of the largest Ramsar
         Sites in the world. The Delta was declared a World Heritage site under the UNESCO
         convention in 2014. With its high variety of habitat types which supports high diversity
         of biological life forms, it remains one of the most important areas for biodiversity
         conservation in the world.

1.4      The Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB) is a hydrologically complex, and deeply
         interconnected system which highlights the importance of transboundary solutions.
         Community livelihoods in Angola, Namibia and Botswana depend on the CORB’s
         floodplains, rivers, wetlands and other natural resources. Water resources in the CORB
         are facing competing demands that jeopardize the sustainability of livelihoods and
         ecosystems. In addition to threats posed by poverty, rapid rural population growth, and
         climate change, the CORB’s water resources face demands from urbanization trends;
         resource-based livelihoods; expanding tourism; commercial agriculture; and water
         extractions.

1.5      Innovations in transboundary water financing are key to achieve economies of scale and
         scope for transboundary basin financing needs that cannot otherwise be accomplished
         at a national level. This project will support the operationalization and viability of the
         CORB Fund towards sustainable development in the Cubango-Okavango river basin. The
         Fund’s operationalization will be instrumental to address basin priorities and strengthen
         stakeholder coordination. The project will (a) support the consolidation and expansion

                                                2


                                                                                                       Confidential
          of the CORB Fund and advance collaboration towards its long-term sustainability; (b)
          enable innovative financing to address priority areas, laying the foundation for
          larger/more complex investments in the future; and (c)support targeted technical
          assistance to maximize the impact of livelihood interventions and biodiversity
          conservation. The project is intended to be innovative through the development of
          project concepts and business models and strengthening OKACOM's capacity on
          financing innovation. These interventions will contribute to the overall global targets to
          improve cooperative management of shared water ecosystems, conserve biodiversity,
          and build resilience.

1.6       Cubango-Okavango River Basin: Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters (CORB-
          FIT) aims to support the operationalization of the Cubango-Okavango river basin
          (CORB) Fund and the implementation of cooperative transboundary water
          management for development in the basin. This project will address these challenges
          through the operationalization of the CORB fund, bolstering innovative financing, and
          enhancing capacity and collaboration on transboundary water resources management
          in the basin, which aligns with the region’s long-term goal of sustainable and equitable
          economic development.

1.7       The Project includes four components:

1.7.1     Component 1. CORB Fund operationalization. This component will support the
          capacity, consolidation and expansion of the CORB Fund as an innovative financial
          mechanism, and advance collaboration towards its long-term sustainability. The
          component will complement the funding provided to the CORB Fund by other
          development partners (i.e., UNDP and the European Union), focusing on supporting the
          Fund’s implementation through (a) the establishment and rolling-out of the Fund’s
          governance structure, operations, and systems to ensure effective functioning; and (b)
          the implementation of stakeholder coordination to enable the CORB Fund’s long-term
          sustainability.

1.7.1.1   Sub-component 1.1. Establishment and implementation of the CORB Fund’s capacity,
          governance, and operational systems. Project activities will focus on: (a) strengthening
          the capacity of the CORB Fund Secretariat through support for the staffing of key
          positions; (b) rolling out a Decision Support System(DSS) to mainstream a process to
          prioritize resilient investments in the Basin. The DSS will be used as an operational tool
          to integrate and enhance the management and monitoring of the project pipeline and
          reporting; (c) provide targeted training to Fund Secretariat staff on key topics related to
          the Fund’s operationalization, including innovative financing, donor engagement, cross-
          border project governance, investment preparation, and stakeholder engagement; and
          (d) strengthen operational and financial management systems of the CORB Fund
          (accounting systems, procurement systems, financial management systems,
          environmental and social management systems, human resources policies and manuals,
          among other), considering gender inclusion.

1.7.1.2   Sub-component 1.2. Implementation of stakeholder coordination. Activities under this
          sub-component will focus on robust stakeholder coordination toward the CORB Fund’s
          long-term sustainability, through: (a) organizing and implementing a CORB Fund donor

                                                 3


                                                                                                        Confidential
          coordination mechanism, including basin-wide stakeholder forums and development
          partners roundtables to identify synergies and opportunities for collaboration, promote
          the CORB Fund’s progress, and present viable investment opportunities; and (b)
          establishing regular coordination mechanisms between OKACOM, Member States,
          donors and implementing partners to align strategies and funding flow.

1.7.1.3   Sub-component 1.3 Communication and Knowledge Management. The project will
          support (a) implementation of the CORB Fund’s communication and knowledge
          management strategy, which be essential for the CORB Fund to showcase its value and
          impacts, transparency and accountability to its stakeholders and as a means to continue
          to attract finance, including knowledge exchange to allow cross-fertilization and
          learning across CORB Fund funded and other related activities in the basin. Support will
          include the implementation of OKACOM’s International Cooperation Partners (ICP)
          Forum, aimed to promote and strengthen the integrated, sustainable management, use
          and development of the CORB at national and transboundary levels according to
          internationally recognized best practices. (b) Support the collaboration and
          engagement with the International Waters Learning Exchange and Resource Network
          (IW:LEARN) to foster and facilitate knowledge exchange with other transboundary
          basins.

Component 1 Outputs: CORB Fund Secretariat staffed; Decision Support System (DSS) rolled out;
targeted training to Fund Secretariat staff delivered; operational and financial management
systems of the CORB Fund strengthened; CORB Fund donor coordination forums and
development partners roundtables implemented; regular coordination mechanisms between
OKACOM, Member States, donors and implementing partners in place; OKACOM’s International
Cooperation Partners (ICP)Forum implemented; and participation in IW:LEARN training and
events, provision of experience notes and sharing of lessons learned, and setting up a Website.

1.7.2     Component 2: Enabling Innovative Financing in the CORB. This component will enable
          innovative financing in the CORB to address the priority areas identified by Angola,
          Botswana and Namibia, laying the foundation for larger/more complex investments in
          the future. The component’s activities will focus on two complementary areas of
          support: (a) preparing the CORB Fund Financing Roadmap and project concepts for
          investment; and (b) capitalizing the CORB Fund Endowment.

1.7.2.1   Sub-component 2.1: Preparation of CORB Fund financing roadmap and concepts for
          investment. This sub-component will set the basis for the implementation of CORB
          Fund projects in the medium and long-term. It will develop investment-ready project
          packages to attract co-financing from donors, development banks, and private sector
          investors, including the implementation of technical review and quality assurance
          processes to ensure alignment with CORB Fund objectives and environmental
          safeguards. Developing the CORB Fund into a financial institution includes the
          recruitment of a professional Fund Manager, whose role will be complementary to that
          of the Executive Director (with the former focused on financial- and risk management
          exclusively, and the latter focused on overall project pipeline development, donor
          coordination, among others).



                                                4


                                                                                                     Confidential
1.7.2.2 As part of this sub-component, the project will: (a) conduct an assessment of CORB Fund
         strategy and governance structure, including making adjustments to allow the CORB
         Fund to evolve into a financial institution, and developing capitalization and financing
         plan; (b) engaging with Ministers of Finance of Angola, Botswana and Namibia on the
         CORB Fund support and financing; (c) identifying outsourcing options for a professional
         Fund Manager to run the CORB Fund, including bidding out the work to the market; (d)
         conduct market sounding on the financing needs, roles, instruments, and terms needed
         from CORB Fund to play a catalytic role in the region for transboundary projects, as well
         as identification of an initial investment pipeline (this includes a roadmap for CORB Fund
         financial instruments over time); and (e) initiating funding concepts for investments in
         transboundary projects via the CORB Fund, considering gender aspects and inclusion of
         Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities (IPLCs), including a pre-feasibility study for
         priority investment projects.

1.7.2.3 This last point includes supporting the preparation of pre-feasibility and feasibility
         studies for priority projects, economic and financial analysis, Environmental and Social
         Impact Assessments (ESIA), and technical designs ensuring environmental and social
         considerations, and gender and climate resilience considerations; as well as the
         development of investment-ready project packages to attract co-financing from donors,
         development banks, and private sector investors. As needed, conduct stakeholder
         engagement activities (both at Member states level and local level to ensure greater
         buy-in for priority investment project and minimize any downstream social conflicts. The
         project will ensure the inclusion of gender aspects and IPLCs, as well as beneficiaries and
         other stakeholders in the design and implementation of CORB investments and
         governance. This work will be pivotal to identify where the CORB Fund can play a
         catalytic role through selected projects in the Basin. Project activities will identify and
         prioritize pipeline projects in close collaboration with Angola, Botswana, and Namibia,
         based on basin-wide needs assessments and strategic priorities.

1.7.2.4 Sub-component 2.2: Capitalization of the CORB Fund endowment. This sub-
         component will provide seed capital to be placed into the CORB Fund endowment. This
         is contingent upon the governance, staffing, and arrangement for outsourcing the
         management of the funds being in place. This seed capital would be matched 1:1 by the
         three member states and donor(s), with a full target funding of $20 million of initial
         capital for the endowment.

Component 2 Outputs:- CORB Fund financing roadmap and concepts for investment; investment-
ready project packages, including gender and IPLCs inclusion considerations, to attract co-
financing; assessment of CORB Fund strategy and governance structure; professional Fund
Manager recruited; market sounding on the financing needs, roles, instruments, and terms
needed from CORB Fund; initial investment pipeline; seed capital placed into the CORB Fund
endowment.

1.7.3    Component 3: Enhanced livelihoods and biodiversity in the Cubango-Okavango river
         basin. Building on past and ongoing analytical work supported by the Cooperation in
         International Waters in Africa (CIWA) program, this component will support targeted
         technical assistance to maximize the impact of livelihood interventions and biodiversity


                                                5


                                                                                                       Confidential
          conservation in the Basin, focused on two priority areas: a) the economics of
          biodiversity; and (b) capacity building for integrating biodiversity as part of planning and
          investment in the Okavango basin. Activities under this component will inform and
          strengthen livelihood interventions and biodiversity conservation in the CORB through
          applied technical assistance, basin-wide knowledge generation, and targeted capacity
          building, contributing to enhance the impact of the future project pipeline linked to
          these areas. The activities will consider the targets set out in the Kunming-Montreal
          Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF), adopted during the fifteenth meeting of the
          Conference of the Parties (COP 15). The framework supports the achievement of the
          Sustainable Development Goals and sets out an ambitious pathway to reach the global
          vision of a world living in harmony with nature by 2050. Among the Framework’s targets
          for 2030.

1.7.3.1   Sub-component 3.1. Implementation of the Basin-wide economics of biodiversity.
          Activities under this sub-component will (a) design and implement a basin-wide
          economics of biodiversity study, quantifying the economic value of key ecosystem
          services (including water regulation, flood control, biodiversity, and tourism) and
          identifying priority conservation–development trade-offs; and (b) develop a
          biodiversity–livelihood investment case for the CORB to inform donor and government
          funding decisions, including gender-responsive and socially inclusive considerations.
          Sub-component 3.2. Capacity building for integrating biodiversity values into planning
          and investment decisions. The project will (a) provide capacity building for OKACOM
          member states (Angola, Botswana, Namibia) on integrating biodiversity economic
          valuation into national policies, development planning, and CORB Fund investment
          criteria; and (b) develop policy briefs and guidelines to operationalize biodiversity
          valuation in project selection and natural resource management, integrating gender and
          IPLCs inclusion considerations, targeted at decision-makers, basin managers, and
          private sector investors.

Component 3 Outputs: Basin-wide economics of biodiversity study; biodiversity–livelihood
investment case for the CORB to inform donor and government funding decisions; capacity
building workshops for OKACOM member states (Angola, Botswana, Namibia); policy briefs and
guidelines to operationalize biodiversity valuation.

1.7.4     Component 4: Project Management. This component will support project management
          costs and capacity building of the implementing agency, notably the CORB Fund
          Secretariat in OKACOM (see C. Implementation Arrangements).

1.7.4.1   Sub-component 4.1. Project management. Activities under this sub-component will
          support project management costs. Sub-component 4.2. Monitoring and Evaluation
          (M&E). The project will (a) organize a Project inception workshop; (b) establish and
          conduct ProjectSteering Committee (PSC) meetings; and (c) conduct a mid-term and a
          terminal evaluation compliant with donor requirements. OKACOM will follow an M&E
          plan to monitor and report on project progress and to adjust as required, based on
          lessons learned. The following reports will be provided: Annual Work Plan and Budget;
          Bi-annual Project Progress Report; Quarterly Financial Report; Mid-term and Terminal
          Evaluation. The project will also implement a robust gender responsive Monitoring and
          Evaluation plan that collects both gender and sex-disaggregated data with gender

                                                 6


                                                                                                         Confidential
         sensitive collection methods and will include gender-specific indicators to record
         progress in gender mainstreaming efforts.

Component 4 Outputs: M&E reports, including project progress reports, midterm evaluation and
terminal evaluation report. The project will contribute to reducing the gender and social inclusion
gap in the management and development of water resources. Efforts will be made to ensure that
all activities associated with this project take into account and seek to accommodate gender
differences in terms of roles and responsibilities related to water access, management and
utilization as well to consider gender inequalities that exist in the region, including women’s
unequal access to decision-making processes related to water resource management. Specific
activities will be identified during project preparation through a gender and social inclusion gap
assessment. They will likely address: (i) mainstreaming gender and social inclusion in the
sustainable management of water resources and biodiversity in the CORB; (ii) breaking barriers
and maximizing opportunities for women and marginalized groups to participate in CORB Fund-
financed activities; and (iii) mainstreaming gender and social inclusion in sustainable water
management and biodiversity public policies. Illustrative examples of the way in which the project
will seek to reduce the gender and social inclusion gap are listed below. The project may also
support the establishment or strengthening of OKACOM Women in Water Diplomacy Network
within the framework of the SADC and Global Networks.

1.8      The CORB-FIT is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environment and Social
         Framework (ESF).

2.       Objective/Description of SEP
2.1      The World Bank’s ESS 10 recognizes the importance of open and transparent
         engagement with all project stakeholders, based on the recognition that effective
         stakeholder engagement can improve environmental and social (E&S) sustainability of
         project activities, enhance project acceptance, and implementation, and allow
         stakeholders to contribute to project design. The key objectives of stakeholder
         engagement are to identify all relevant stakeholders and design effective methods and
         strategies for engaging such stakeholders. It is firmly believed that once a suitable
         programme and adaptable plan for stakeholder engagement are required for seamless
         engagement with stakeholders over the Project’s life and support the CORB-FIT in
         achieving its objectives.

2.2      WB guidelines stipulate that Grant Recipients are required to develop clear guidelines
         how they will engage with stakeholders in an inclusive and integrated manner as part of
         a project’s environmental and social assessment and project design and
         implementation. The CORB-FIT will conduct and participate in stakeholder engagements
         that enhance understanding of the value of transboundary cooperation in the
         conservation of the River Basin’s environment and its wetlands. It is critical that all
         stakeholders are fairly involved in decisions and actions to maintain the CORB’s place as
         a globally important wetland with better understanding, sound management and
         responsible utilisation of the Basin’s natural resources. This means, consultations with
         stakeholders have to be meaningful and be based on stakeholder identification and
         analysis, clear planning on how to engage stakeholders, disclosure of information, actual



                                                7


                                                                                                      Confidential
      consultations, as well as responses to stakeholder grievances and reporting back to
      stakeholders.

2.3   As such, the SEP will help facilitate inclusive communication and provide an instrument
      that will help capture a wide range of issues and concerns. Identifying the major
      stakeholders affected by the project either directly or indirectly (including vulnerable
      groups) as well as those with other interests that could influence decisions about the
      project.

2.4   The overall purpose of a SEP is as follows:
      (i)     Stakeholder Identification: Maps out all relevant stakeholders (communities,
              NGOs, government, workers) and analyzes their potential impact on the project.
      (ii)    Engagement Strategy: Defines how to engage (consultations, workshops,
              feedback mechanisms) and when, tailored to different groups, including
              vulnerable populations.
      (iii)   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM): Establishes clear processes for
              stakeholders to raise concerns, provide feedback, or lodge complaints, including
              timelines for resolution and reporting.
      (iv)    Monitoring & Evaluation: Details on how the effectiveness of engagement will be
              assessed and reported to the World Bank.
      (v)     Social Inclusion: Ensures vulnerable groups' views are considered, promoting
              equity.


2.5   This purpose is in line with the OKACOM Communication Strategy and Stakeholder
      Engagement Plan 2020-2025 (CSSEP), which sets out guidelines on how to focus the
      messaging and specifies the various tiers and types of stakeholders in the CORB. As such,
      meaningful engagements with these stakeholders throughout the project cycle is an
      essential aspect of good does not only represent prudent project management but also
      provides opportunities for OKACOM to learn from the experience, knowledge, and
      concerns of the affected and interested stakeholders especially local communities, and
      to manage their expectations by clarifying the extent of OKACOM’s responsibilities and
      resources under CORB-FIT Project.

3.    Stakeholder identification and analysis per project component
3.1   Methodology:




                                             8


                                                                                                  Confidential
3.1.1   Project stakeholders are people and or institutions interested, have a role or affected by
        the Project. The OKACOM CSSEP recognizes that the CORB stakeholder groups can be
        placed in three categories as shown in the Figure above. The SEP is designed to anchor
        all stakeholder engagement in a systematic way that ensures strengthening of the
        government capacity of the CORB-FIT project. It is also intended that such capacity will
        be extended to both OKACOM and CORB Fund Structures. Further to this, the CORB-FIT
        Project will start-off with consideration of the stakeholders identified in the OKACOM
        CSSEP and progressively adapt the list as new information about the range of relevant
        stakeholders as the project implementation process continues. These stakeholders
        include affected parties (as defined in section 3.2), other interested parties (as defined
        in section 3.3) and disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups (as defined in section
        3.4).

3.1.2   The following principles will underpin the SEP for this project:

        (i)     Public consultation and transparency: Public consultations for the project will be
                done annually for the duration of the project and carried out in an open and
                transparent manner, free of external manipulation, interference, coercion, or
                intimidation.

        (ii)    Informed participation and feedback loop: Information will be provided to and
                widely distributed among all stakeholders using digital media and any appropriate
                format; stakeholder feedback and reviews will be prioritised while demonstrating
                that due care has been provided when addressing comments and concerns of the
                stakeholders.

        (iii)   Inclusiveness and sensitivity: Stakeholder identification will continually be
                undertaken so as to support better communications and build effective
                relationships. The participation process for the project is inclusive and ensures
                that grassroots and the lowest level of stakeholders take part. All stakeholders at
                all times are encouraged to be involved in the consultation process. Equal access
                to information is provided to all stakeholders i.e. when non-digital formats are
                most suitable, efforts will be made to deliver information using such non-digital
                means. Sensitivity to stakeholders’ needs is the key principle underlying the
                selection of engagement methods. Special attention is given to vulnerable groups
                that may be at risk of being left out of project benefits, particularly women, the
                elderly, persons with disabilities, displaced persons, and migrant workers and
                communities, and the cultural sensitivities of diverse ethnic groups.

        (iv)    Trust and accountability: Stakeholder engagement to be done in an environment
                where honest, taking ownership, and safe to speak up are thriving with clear
                expectations and mutual reliance.

3.2.    Affected parties
3.2.1   Affected parties include local communities, community members, and other parties
        that may be subject to direct impacts from the Project. The projects’ stakeholders also
        include parties other than the directly affected communities. include NGOs or civil
        society groups at the local and national levels, business owners and providers of

                                                9


                                                                                                      Confidential
        services within the project area, research and environmental groups other government
        officials.

Project-Affected Parties
Stakeholder group                Interests                                Influence

                                                                          Interest    Impact

Local communities                Diversified livelihood systems           Very        Medium
                                 Enhanced engagement processes            High
                                 Transparent communication
                                 channels
Non-Governmental                  Implementing partners                   High        Medium
Organisations                    Involvement in conservation and
                                 natural resources management
                                 Scientific and social understanding of
                                 a range of community problems
                                 Involvement in community
                                 development activites
State parties (Governments):      Supervision and monitoring              High        Low
Angola, Botswana and Namibia     Coordinated and equitable basin
                                 development
Community-Based                  CBOs Represents the interests of         High        Medium
Organisations (CBO’s)            different interested parties
                                 Especially vulnerable groups
District level administration     Supervision and monitoring              High        Low
                                 Understanding of social issues
                                 Government instruments at the
                                 grassroot level
OKACOM Structures (OBSC, CoC     Supervision and monitoring               High        Medium
& FoM)
                                 Custodians of joint basin
                                 management
                                 Promote programs for improving
                                 socio-economic state of basin
                                 communities
Donors: International funders;   Leading various areas around             High        High
multi-lateral agencies           operationalisation of the CORB Fund
                                 Strong interest in the preservation of
                                 the Okavango Delta
                                 Strong interest in resilient
                                 investment and improved local
                                 community livelihoods


                                             10


                                                                                               Confidential
3.3.    Other interested parties

        The projects’ stakeholders also include parties other than the directly affected
        communities, including: [add list of other possible stakeholders].

3.3.1   Other Interested Parties – individuals/groups/entities that may not experience direct
        impacts from the implemented Project(s) but who consider or perceive their interests as
        being affected by the project(s)and/or who could affect the project and the process of
        its implementation in some way. The list of other interested stakeholders is as follows:

        (i)     The General public
        (ii)    ICPS/Donors who have supported various interventions at the different stages of
                implementation of the SAP
        (iii)   ICPs/Donors with interest to support and collaborate with OKACOM in the future
        (iv)    Academic (Research and Development) Institutions
        (v)     Global communities/tourists
        (vi)    Environmental Activists/Lobbyist

3.4.    Disadvantaged / vulnerable individuals or groups1

3.4.1   Disadvantaged and vulnerable individuals and groups often lack the ability to voice their
        concerns or fully understand the impacts of a project, which can lead to their exclusion
        from stakeholder engagement processes. In the CORB, a vulnerability assessment
        identified hotspots for climate and resource vulnerabilities. Large sections of the local
        communities, individuals and groups that are situated in those parts of the basin lack
        access to digital media and fair means for participating in the project engagements. This
        exacerbates the disadvantages and vulnerabilities and at the same time calls for
        stronger, innovative methods for stakeholder engagement that allows for inclusivity and
        equitable participation. The CORB-FIT project aims to support comprehensive reforms
        with basin-wide impacts, ultimately benefiting all stakeholders and citizens of the
        riparian states by improving conservation and climate-resilience investment, and
        livelihood systems.

3.4.2   Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the project will be further
        confirmed and consulted through dedicated means, as appropriate. Description of the
        methods of engagement that will be undertaken by the project is provided in the
        following sections.

4.      Stakeholder Engagement Program

4.1.    Summary of stakeholder engagement done during project preparation

4.1.1   To conceptualize and agree on the components, outcomes and focus of the project, two
        general stakeholder consultation workshops were undertaken. The first being during the
        OKACOM week of statutory meetings where the principles and the focus areas of the
        project were discussed and jointly agreed by various stakeholders including
        representatives of the CORB Member State Governments and District Level
        Administrative Authorities. To further align and develop synergies with similar

                                              11


                                                                                                    Confidential
         interventions and projects, multiple stakeholder meetings were also held. It has been
         planned in this SEP that further stakeholder engagements will be undertaken in the near
         future to consolidate the project development processes and affirm the principles and
         focus areas that have been coined in the various project components presented in
         section 1 of this SEP. Further, consultations with various vulnerable groups (including
         any Indigenous Peoples) are also planned to take place as early as possible during
         preparation, all in line with the World Bank’s ESS 10 on Stakeholder Engagement and
         Information Disclosure. Outcomes of the consultation workshops and their minutes will
         be used to update the SEP.

4.1.2    During implementation of the CORB-FIT project, a set of diverse stakeholders will be
         involved. The counterparts from Member States that will be involved in the Project
         Governance will come from the four statutory Organs of the Commission namely: i) The
         OKACOM Forum of Ministers (one from each of the riparian states) responsible for
         Water, ii) The Council of Commissioners comprising senior officials from the riparian
         States (three (3) from each Country), iii) The Okavango Basin Steering Committee (OBSC)
         comprising directors of Water, environment, Agriculture (including fisheries) – three (3)
         from each Member State, and iv) Members from the five (5) Specialized Technical
         Committees who will also participate in the technical reference group (TRG) for the
         Project. Members of the Project Steering Committee will also be drawn from the OBSC
         and Council to guide the implementation of the Project as appropriate. These
         counterparts will be expected to continue in support of the implementation of the
         project until its completion.

4.1.3    The following stakeholders have been consulted so far as part of the project
         preparations:

 Organization        Name                    TITLE              Location    Date      Mode of
                                                                                    consultation
1. Basin stakeholders and Development Partners Consultations
 UNDP             ▪ Madeleine     UNDP Regional Technical Addis            August    Virtual
                      Nyiratuza   Advisor for Water, Ocean                 4th 2025 consultation
                                  Governance, Ecosystems and               August    (Teams
                                  Biodiversity (Africa)                    18th      meeting)
                                                                           2025
 AFD             ▪   Audrey Seon Project Lead Expert in the   Paris        August    Virtual
                 ▪   Florence    transformation of public     Paris        4th 2025 consultation
                     Magalon     institutions                 Paris                  (Teams
                 ▪   Lionel      Head of Water & Sanitation Johannesburg             meeting)
                     Goujon      Task Team Leader Water and Johannesburg
                 ▪   Martin      Sanitation                   Johannesburg
                     Lemenager Project Manager
                 ▪   Mahaut      Sustainable      Development
                     Stefani     Officer, Southern Africa
                 ▪   Marie-Anne
                     De Villepin
 EU              ▪   Arnaud De- Team Leader Water             Brussels     August    Virtual
                     Vanssay     Head of Operational Section Brussels      4th 2025 consultation
                 ▪   Antoine     Programme Officer            Gaborone     August    (Teams
                     Saintraint                                            21st 2025 meeting)

                                               12


                                                                                                     Confidential
                ▪ Matlhare      Strategic Advisor on Finance
                  Tebogo        for Water at Netherlands
                ▪ Hein          Water Partnership
                  Gietema
Pegasys         ▪ Mike Vice     Senior Associate, Resilience U.K.         August   Virtual
                ▪ Guy           Practice                                  4th 2025 consultation
                  Robertson     Manager                                            (Teams
                                                                                   meeting)
TNC             ▪ Sekgowa       KAZA Landscape Director        Zambia     August   Virtual
                  Motsumi       Conservation Director - Africa            4th 2025 consultation
                ▪ Kim Young-    Region                                             (Teams
                  Overton                                                          meeting)
Espelia         ▪ Alois Belie   Specialist                     Paris      August   Virtual
                ▪ Lucie Perez   Specialist                                4th 2025 consultation
                                                                                   (Teams
                                                                                   meeting)
2. OKACOM regional and country counterparts

                ▪ Octavio Nani OBSC Co-Chairperson             Angola      28 – 29 Maun
                                                                          July 2025 Botswana
                ▪ Mr Maceu      OBSC Member                    Angola      28 – 29 Maun
                  Neves                                                   July 2025 Botswana
                ▪ Dr            OBSC Co-Chairperson            Botswana    28 – 29 Maun
                  Kobamelo                                                July 2025 Botswana
                  Dikgola
                ▪ Lesego        OBSC Member                    Botswana    28 – 29 Maun
                  Raditsebe                                               July 2025 Botswana
                ▪ Ms Wendy      OBSC Member                    Botswana    28 – 29 Maun
                  Seone                                                   July 2025 Botswana
                ▪ Ms Cynthia    OBSC Co-Chairperson,           Namibia     28 – 29 Maun
                  Ortmann                                                 July 2025 Botswana
                ▪ Mr            OBSC Member                    Namibia     28 – 29 Maun
                  Christopher                                             July 2025 Botswana
                  Munikasu
                ▪ Dr Victoria   OBSC Member                    Namibia     28 – 29 Maun
                  Shifidi                                                 July 2025 Botswana
                ▪ Mr Carolino   OKACOM Council of             Angola       31st July Maun
                  Mendes        Commissioners                             2025       Botswana
                ▪ Mr Pirre      Ministry of Water and Energy, Angola       31st July Maun
                  Kiala         Commissioner                              2025       Botswana
                ▪ Mr Nchidzi    Commissioner, Co-             Botswana    31st July Maun
                  Mmolawa       chairperson                               2025       Botswana
                ▪ Mr Botsalo    Communication and             Botswana    31st July Maun
                  Thamuku       Outreach Officer                          2025       Botswana
                ▪ Mr Teofilus   Council Co-Chair,             Namibia     31st July Maun
                  Nghitila      Commissioner                              2025       Botswana
                ▪ Ms Lilian     OKACOM Council of             Namibia        st
                                                                          31 July Maun
                  Mbaeva        Commissioner                              2025       Botswana
                ▪ Mr. Jerry     OKACOM Council of             Namibia     31st July Maun
                  Mikka         Commissioner                              2025       Botswana



                                              13


                                                                                                  Confidential
                     4.2.          Summary of project stakeholder needs and methods, tools and techniques for
                                   stakeholder engagement.

                     4.2.1         The Stakeholder Engagement Plan below outlines the engagement process, methods,
                                   including sequencing, topics of consultations and target stakeholders. The World Bank
                                   and the Borrower do not tolerate reprisals and retaliation against project stakeholders
                                   who share their views about Bank-financed projects.

                     Table 1: SEP Summary Table

Project                           Target               Topic of consultation /    Method used            Responsibilities   Frequency/Timeline
stage                             stakeholders         message
                                  Stakeholders of      Disclose relevant          Consultation to        OKACOM             This was done
                                  all levels,          project information to     collect insights on    Secretariat and    regularly and mostly
                                  including Project    stakeholders and solicit   the priority areas     World Bank         virtual because of
                                  Affected Parties     inputs into the focus      that should be used    Partners           the different
                                  and other            areas and priority         to build the project                      locations of the
                                  interested parties   components of the          concept. Email,                           various stakeholders.
                                  (Full list in        project.                   workshops, face to                        The goal to meet all




   - Preparation stage
                                  Table….)             Discuss and jointly        face. Regular                             GEF milestones and
                                                       agree on the Project       feedback using                            deadlines has really
                                                       scope and, approach        virtual platforms                         dictated the
                                                       and methodology for                                                  frequency of the
                                                       the SEP                                                              engagements.
                                  Representatives      Regular updates on         Consultations to       CORB FUND          Annual meeting for
                                  of basin local       project activities and     review progress        Secretariat,       the ICP Forum, when
                                  communities,         specific interventions     and jointly agree      Project            need be extra
                                  communities,         for local communities,     on the way forward     Implementation     ordinary meeting can
                                  traditional          vulnerable groups and      and how to adapt       Unit, OKACOM       be convened
                                  authorities,         the environment.           the components         Secretariat and
                                  regional/district    Implementation of the      based on lessons       World Bank
                                  administrative       SEP and GRM                learned to             Partners
                                  entities,            procedures.                efficiently achieve
                                  Ministries of the                               the project
                                  Governments                                     objectives.




   Project implementation phase
                                                       Project overview,          Consultations to                          Regular meeting with
                                                       Review Progress, SEP,      always ensure                             affected parties and
                                                       GRM procedures and         alignment and                             government
                                                       Feedback mechanisms        remove                                    stakeholders
                                  Implementing         Progress reporting, SEP    duplications with
                                  partners/NGOs        and GRM procedures         the actions
                                  and ICPs             Monitoring and             implemented by
                                  supporting           Evaluation                 other partners




                                                                             14


                                                                                                                                        Confidential
        parallel           Improved project scope   Email, workshops,
        components         based on lessons         face to face.
                           learned                  Regular feedback
                                                    using virtual
                                                    platforms. Annual
                                                    for the ICP forum




4.3.     Proposed strategy to incorporate the views of vulnerable groups

4.3.1    The CORB-FIT project will seek the views of local communities and other vulnerable
         groups by convening kgotla meetings. Kgotla meetings are gatherings in a cultural
         setting where all concerned, affected or interested parties are invited to participate in
         open deliberations to seek solutions that are jointly accepted and fair for everyone.
         These meetings will be held in collaboration with the Traditional Authorities and District
         Administrative Entities of the Governments. Information will be shared through media
         announcements and via local agents, especially traditional liaison persons and by phone.
         The following measures will be taken in order to remove obstacles to full and enabling
         participation / access to information:

         (i)     Targeted engagements
         (ii)    Feedback mechanisms to ensure that messages are received timeously
         (iii)   Robust grievance mechanisms that can be leveraged by vulnerable parties2

5.       Resources and Responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement


5.1.     Implementation Arrangements and Resources

5.1.1    Implementation of all ESF instruments including the SEP will be financed from the
         program budget. An estimated budget will be provided in an updated SEP at the start
         of program implementation. Based on prior experience in similar engagement
         undertaken by OKACOM, the budget for the SEP is proposed to be approximately
         USD$100,000. The detailed costs will be presented once the activity plans are
         developed.

5.1.2    The CORB-FIT will be anchored in the CORB FUND Secretariat and a Programmes
         Manager within the will oversee the E & S activities including the implementation of the
         SEP and coordinating all stakeholder engagement activities.

6.       Grievance Mechanism


         A Grievance Mechanism is a system that allows not only grievances, but also queries,
         suggestions, positive feedback, and concerns of project-affected parties related to the
                                               15


                                                                                                      Confidential
          environmental and social performance of a project to be submitted and responded to
          in a timely manner.

6.1.      Description of Grievance Mechanism (GM)
Table 2: Illustrative Table on the GM Steps - to be adjusted to each project

 [Step                   Description of process (e.g.)           Timeframe           Responsibility
 GM implementation       Establish a mechanism for different     Before project      PIU
 structure               levels- Project Level and Community     inception
                         Level
 Grievance uptake        Grievances can be submitted via the     Throughout the      PIU
                         following channels                      project
                                                                 implementation
                         E-mail to info@okacom.org

                         Letter to grievance focal persons at
                         local facilities
                         In-person at project implementation
                         sites in their locality
                         Grievance or suggestion boxes
                         located project implementation
                         sites
                         Social media facebook: on the CORB

 Sorting, processing     Any complaint received is logged        Upon receipt of     Local grievance focal
                         and, categorised by GRM focal           complaint           points
                         points and shared with

 Acknowledgement         Receipt of the grievance is             Within 2 days of    Local grievance focal
 and follow-up           acknowledged to the complainant         receipt             points
                         by PIU/ E&S specialist

 Verification,           Investigation of the complaint is led   Within 10 working   Complaint Committee
 investigation, action   by PIU and proposed resolution is       days                composed of the
                         formulated by CORB Fund board of                            Executive Director,
                         directors PIU and relevant                                  Board of Directors and E
                         stakeholders and communicated to                            & S Specialist
                         the complainant by PIU.

 Monitoring and          Data on complaints will be collected    On going            PIU/Contractors
 evaluation              by PIU or in logbook and reported to
                         CORB fund Board of directors
                         quarterly
 Provision of            Feedback from complainants              Within 10 working   PIU
 feedback                regarding their satisfaction with       days
                         complaint resolution is collected by
                         PIU




                                                    16


                                                                                                             Confidential
Training               Training needs for staff/consultants   Training will be done     PIU/ WB
                       in the PIUs, Contractors, and          as soon as the
                       Supervision Consultants are as         project is effective,
                       follows:                               and follow-up
                                                              trainings will be done
                       1. Training for PIUs Staff and         prior the initiation of
                       Consultants                            activities.
                       Understanding the GRM
                       Framework: Overview of grievance
                       handling procedures, roles, and
                       responsibilities.
                       Grievance Documentation &
                       Record-Keeping: Training on
                       maintaining grievance registries,
                       recording complaints, and updating
                       databases.

                       Legal & Policy Framework:
                       Understanding national laws,
                       environmental and social
                       safeguards, and donor policies
                       related to grievances.

                       Monitoring & Reporting: Training
                       on data collection, analysis, and
                       preparing periodic grievance reports
                       2. Training for Contractors/Vendors

                       Awareness of GRM Process:
                       Understanding how the grievance
                       redress system works and its role in
                       addressing complaints.

                       Reporting Mechanisms: Guidelines
                       for documenting and reporting
                       grievances to the PIUs.

If relevant, payment   [If relevant, describe how payment
of reparations         of reparations will be handled
following complaint
resolution

Appeals process        The GRM Focal Person will formally
                       notify the complainant about the
                       resolution of the GRM within 7 days
                       after the date of the notification.




                                                  17


                                                                                                  Confidential
                        If the complainant accepts the
                        resolution, the GRM focus person
                        will take a written statement of such
                        acceptance and will immediately
                        take necessary actions to implement
                        the agreed resolution.

                        If a grievance remains unresolved,
                        legal action may be pursued in
                        accordance with the laws and
                        provisions of the riparian state
                        where the project activity is carried
                        out

6.1.1     The CORB fund recognizes the different types of workers that will be involved in project
          activities. Effective grievance redress mechanism for addressing and managing
          workplace and employment related conflicts or complaints as well as GBV is crucial for
          the Project. A grievance structure will therefore be established for project workers
          (direct workers and contracted/supply workers), as required in ESS2. Complaints
          received will be promptly reviewed to address project-related concerns in line with the
          Revised OKACOM human resource manual including the world bank Grievances redress
          system. The CORB fund will have other measures in place to handle sensitive and
          confidential complaints, including those related to Sexual Exploitation and
          Abuse/Harassment (SEA/SH) in line with the World Bank ESF Good Practice Note on
          SEA/SH.1

7.         Monitoring and Reporting

7.1.      Summary of how SEP will be monitored and reported upon (including indicators)

7.1.1     A monitoring and evaluation plan to ensure transparency and accountability will be
          concomitantly strengthened and updated on an ongoing basis, with all level
          stakeholders to monitor the implementation process of the SEP based on the
          performance indicators for the project.

7.1.2     SEP reporting will include the following:

          (i)    Progress reporting on the ESS10-Stakeholder Engagement commitments under
                 the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)

          (ii)   Cumulative qualitative reporting on the feedback received during SEP activities,
                 in particular (a) issues that have been raised that can be addressed through
                 changes in project scope and design, and reflected in the basic documentation

1
 In some projects, the GM could be adapted to receive SEA/SH allegations/complaints. If so, the responses
should follow a survivor-centered approach that prioritizes survivors’ dignity, confidentiality and safety,
and the project accountability and response framework. Kindly refer to the Good Practice Notes on
Addressing SEA/SH in Investment Project Financing involving Major Civil Works (page 53) and in Human
Development Operations (page 38).

                                                   18


                                                                                                              Confidential
                such as the Project Appraisal Document, Environmental and Social Assessment,
                Resettlement Plan, Indigenous Peoples Plan, or SEA/SH Action Plan, if needed; (b)
                issues that have been raised and can be addressed during project
                implementation; (c) issues that have been raised that are beyond the scope of the
                project and are better addressed through alternative projects, programs or
                initiatives; and (d) issues that cannot be addressed by the project due to technical,
                jurisdictional or excessive cost-associated reasons. Minutes of meetings
                summarizing the views of the attendees can also be annexed to the monitoring
                reports.

        (iii)   Quantitative reporting based on the indicators included in the SEP. An illustrative
                set of indicators for monitoring and reporting is included in Annex 3.

7.2.    Reporting back to stakeholder groups

7.2.1   It is critical to follow up with stakeholders at different stages of the project cycle. Once
        consultations have taken place, stakeholders will want to know which of their
        suggestions will be used, what risk or impact mitigation measures will be put in place to
        address their concerns, and how, for example, project impacts are monitored. Often
        the same methods used in information disclosure are applied to reporting back to
        stakeholders. Given the current context and the need for effective consultations with
        basin local communities who cannot be reached with digital platforms, alternate means
        such as face to face interviews and focus group discussions may need to be considered
        and their potential for escalating M & E costs.

7.2.2   Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) are essential to ensure successful implementation of
        this SEP and will be undertaken as a part of overall Project implementation. The SEP will
        be periodically revised and updated as necessary during project implementation, to
        ensure that the information presented herein is consistent and is the most recent, and
        that the identified methods of engagement remain appropriate and effective in relation
        to the project context and specific phases of implementation. Any major changes to
        project-related activities or its schedule will be duly reflected in the SEP. Quarterly
        results reporting to the World Bank will include indicator-level reporting on grievances.
        Information on public engagement activities undertaken by the Project during the year
        may be conveyed to the stakeholders in the E&S section of the normal reporting cycle
        for the Project.

7.2.3   The following KPIs will be monitored:

        (i)     Number of consultation activities and other public interactive engagements with
                stakeholders conducted within a reporting period (e.g. quarterly, or annually).
        (ii)    Frequency of public engagement activities.
        (iii)   Number of participants in different engagement activities (where applicable)
        (iv)    Number of public grievances received within a reporting period (e.g. monthly,
                quarterly, or annually) and number of those resolved within the prescribed
                timeline;
        (v)     Type of public grievances received; and
        (vi)    Number of press materials published/broadcast by type of media

                                                19


                                                                                                        Confidential
                                        Annexes
   •   Annex 1. Template to capture minutes/records of consultation meetings
   •   Annex 2. Example of a SEP Budget Table
   •   Annex 3. Sample Table: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP

Other Annexes can include:

   •   Visual summaries such as stakeholder mapping or stakeholder diagrams
   •   Grievance submission form
   •   Project maps (if applicable)




                                           20


                                                                               Confidential
Annex 1: Template to Capture Consultation Minutes

 Stakeholder (Group or             Summary of            Response of Project        Follow-up Action/Next
 Individual)                       Feedback              Implementation Team        Steps




Annex 2: Example of a SEP Budget Table

                                                                      Times/
               Budget categories                Quantity Unit costs   Years    Total costs   Remarks

1. Estimated Staff salaries* and related expenses

1a. E.g., Communications consultant
1b. E.g., Travel costs for staff
1c. E.g., Estimated salaries for Community
Liaison Officers
2. Consultations/ Participatory Planning,
Decision-Making Meetings
2a. E.g., Project launch meetings
2b. E.g., Organization of focus groups
3. Communication campaigns

3a. E.g., Posters, flyers
3b. E.g., Social media campaign
4. Trainings
4a. E.g., Training on social/environmental
issues for PIU and contractor staff
4b. E.g., Training on Gender-Based
Violence (GBV) for PIU and contractor
staff
5. Beneficiary surveys

5a. E.g., Mid-project perception survey
5b. E.g., End-of-project perception survey
6. Grievance Mechanism
6a. E.g., Training of GM committees
6b. E.g., Suggestion boxes in villages
6c. E.g., GM communication materials
                                                   21


                                                                                                     Confidential
6d. E.g., Grievance investigations/site
visits
6e. E.g., GM Information System (setting
up or maintenance)
6f. Other GM Logistical Costs
7. Other expenses

7a. …

TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET:
*Note: Salary costs can be indicative


Annex 3. Sample Table: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP

 Key evaluation Specific Evaluation questions          Potential Indicators        Data        Collection
 questions                                                                         Methods

 GM. To what          •   Are project affected         • Usage of GM and/or        Records from the
 extent have              parties raising issues and     feedback mechanisms       implementing agency
 project-affected         grievances?                  • Requests for              and other relevant
 parties been         •   How quickly/effectively        information from          agencies
 provided with            are the grievances             relevant agencies.
 accessible and           resolved?                    • Use of suggestion
 inclusive means                                         boxes placed in the
 to raise issues                                         villages/project
 and grievances?                                         communities.
 Has the                                               • Number of grievances
 implementing                                            raised by workers,
 agency                                                  disaggregated by
 responded to and                                        gender of workers and
 managed such                                            worksite, resolved
 grievances?                                             within a specified time
                                                         frame.
                                                       • Number of Sexual
                                                         Exploitation, and
                                                         Abuse/Sexual
                                                         Harassment (SEA/SH)
                                                         cases reported in the
                                                         project areas, which
                                                         were referred for
                                                         health, social, legal
                                                         and security support
                                                         according to the
                                                         referral process in
                                                         place. (if applicable)
                                                       • Number of grievances
                                                         that have been (i)

                                               22


                                                                                                  Confidential
                                                       opened, (ii) opened
                                                       for more than 30 days,
                                                       (iii) resolved, (iv)
                                                       closed, and (v)
                                                       number of responses
                                                       that satisfied the
                                                       complainants, during
                                                       the reporting period
                                                       disaggregated by
                                                       category of grievance,
                                                       gender, age, and
                                                       location of
                                                       complainant.
Stakeholder         •    Was there interest and       • Active participation     Stakeholder
engagement               support for the project?        of stakeholders in      Consultation
impact on           •    Were there any                  activities              Attendance
project design           adjustments made during      • Number of actions        Sheets/Minutes
and                      project design and              taken in a timely
implementation.          implementation based on         manner in response      Evaluation forms
How have                 the feedback received?          to feedback received
engagement          •    Was priority information        during consultation     Structured surveys
activities made a        disclosed to relevant           sessions with project
difference in            parties throughout the          affected parties.       Social media/traditional
project design           project cycle?               • Number of                media entries on the
and                                                      consultation            project results
implementation?                                          meetings and public
                                                         discussions where
                                                         the feedback and
                                                         recommendation
                                                         received is reflected
                                                         in project design and
                                                         implementation.
                                                      • Number of
                                                         disaggregated
                                                         engagement
                                                         sessions held,
                                                         focused on at-risk
                                                         groups in the
                                                         project.
Implementation       •   Were the activities          • Percentage of SEP        Communication Strategy
effectiveness.           implemented as planned?          activities             (Consultation Schedule)
Were stakeholder         Why or why not?                  implemented.
engagement           •   Was the stakeholder          • Key barriers to          Periodic Focus Group
activities effective     engagement approach              participation          Discussions
in                       inclusive of disaggregated       identified with
implementation?          groups? Why or why not?          stakeholder            Face-to-face meetings
                                                          representatives.       and/or Focus Group


                                             23


                                                                                                    Confidential
                                                                                •     Number of                         discussions with
                                                                                      adjustments made                  Vulnerable Groups or
                                                                                      in the stakeholder                their representatives
                                                                                      engagement
                                                                                      approach to
                                                                                      improve projects’
                                                                                      outreach, inclusion
                                                                                      and effectiveness.


1
  It is particularly important to understand whether project impacts may disproportionately fall on disadvantaged or vulnerable
individuals or groups, who often do not have a voice to express their concerns or understand the impacts of a project and to ensure
that awareness raising and stakeholder engagement with disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups are adapted to take into
account such groups or individuals particular sensitivities, concerns and cultural sensitivities and to ensure a full understanding of
project activities and benefits. The vulnerability may stem from person’s origin, gender, age, health condition, economic deficiency
and financial insecurity, disadvantaged status in the community (e.g., minorities or fringe groups), dependence on other individuals
or natural resources, etc. Engagement with the vulnerable groups and individuals often requires the application of specific measures
and assistance aimed at the facilitation of their participation in the project-related decision making so that their awareness of and
input to the overall process are commensurate to those of the other stakeholders.

2 Examples may include (i) women: ensure that community engagement teams are gender-balanced and promote women’s leadership

within these, design online and in-person surveys and other engagement activities so that women in unpaid care work can participate;
consider provisions for childcare, transport, and safety for any in-person community engagement activities; promote gender-
segregated consultations and other approaches allowing for the free and enabling participation of women and girls, including groups
of women and girls who are particularly vulnerable to exclusion and risks potentially associated with the project; consult with women’s
organizations, including organizations advocating for survivors’ rights (ii) Pregnant women: develop education materials for pregnant
women on basic hygiene practices, infection precautions, and how and where to seek care based on their questions and concerns; (iii)
Elderly and people with existing medical conditions: develop information on specific needs and explain why they are at more risk &
what measures to take to care for them; tailor messages and make them actionable for particular living conditions (including assisted
living facilities), and health status; target family member; (iii) Persons with disabilities: provide information in accessible formats, like
braille, large print; offer multiple forms of communication, such as text captioning or signed videos, text captioning for hearing
impaired, online materials for people who use assistive technology; consider and take into account gender and other dimensions of
identity and vulnerability and (iv) Children: design information and communication materials in a child-friendly manner and provide
parents with skills to gather and promote children’s voices, best interest, perspectives and participation; mobilize capacity as needed
to be able to safely engage teenagers, and/or engage with organizations advocating for children’s rights.




                                                                    24


                                                                                                                                                Confidential
