Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       The Gambia Water And Sanitation Project (P513113)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 11/19/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05294




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Nov 21, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              The Gambia Water And Sanitation Project (P513113)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P513113                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        WASAP                       2027

                     Operation Name            The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Gambia, The               Gambia, The                               WESTERN AND CENTRAL         Water
                                                                                         AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance       National Water and Electricity            01-Apr-2026                 15-Jul-2026
                     and Economic Affairs      Company (NAWEC)

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     30-Oct-2025               30,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The development objective is to enhance access to water and sanitation services in selected regions of The Gambia and
                     to support policy and institutional sector reforms.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The water supply and sanitation services in The Gambia are currently facing a significant crisis due to ongoing challenges
                     in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). According to the 2023 Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP)
                     report, only 48% of the population has access to safely managed water services, with 68% access in urban areas
                     compared to just 12% in rural areas. Access to basic sanitation services is also a major concern, as only 28% of the
                     population has access to safely managed sanitation, while 15% still practice open defecation, particularly in rural
                     regions. Additionally, the country lacks adequate wastewater treatment, with about 80% of wastewater improperly
                     managed, leading to groundwater contamination and posing significant public health risks. Three key localities in the

                    Nov 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              The Gambia Water And Sanitation Project (P513113)



                     Greater Banjul Area (GBA)—Banjul, Kanifing, and Brikama—are home to approximately 63% of the country's population.
                     The National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC) currently produces 139,000 cubic meters of water daily, which is
                     insufficient to meet the demand. The GBA mainly relies on boreholes that draw water from a sub-shallow aquifer;
                     however, this water source is vulnerable to contamination from untreated sewage and saltwater intrusion caused by
                     rising sea levels related to climate change. The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project (WASAP) aims to support the
                     government's efforts to address the crisis in water and sanitation services in the Greater Banjul Area (GBA) region. This
                     operation includes a series of activities organized into four mutually reinforcing components, which are summarized
                     below: Component 1: Water Resources Monitoring and Conservation ($3.0 million) • Enhancing transboundary
                     cooperation on the Senegal-Mauritanian Aquifer Basin ($0.5 million) • Enhancing water sources monitoring and
                     conservation ($2.5 million) Component 2: Improving Access to Sanitation Services ($8.0 million) Component 2.1: Urban
                     Sanitation (6.5 million) • Emergency wastewater management ($5.0 million) • Construction of a Fecal Sludge Treatment
                     Plant ($1.5 million) Component 2.2: Rural Sanitation Development ($1.5 million) • Construction of Safely Managed
                     Latrines in Targeted Rural Areas ($0.9 million) • Development of a National Sanitation Master Plan (US$0.6 M)
                     Component 3. Improving Access to Urban Drinking Water Services ($15 million) • Component 3.1: Water Supply
                     Infrastructure Development ($14 million) • Component 3.2: Non-Revenue-Water Management through Private Sector
                     ($1.0 million) Component 4. Sector Reforms and Project management: ($4 million) • Component 4.1 Sector Institutional
                     Strengthening through PBCs ($2 million) • Component 4.2 Project management ($2 million) Component 5. Contingent
                     Emergency Response Component (CERC) • Component 5 CERC $0 million TOTAL: $30 million


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings



Public Disclosure
                     The Gambia, nearly surrounded by Senegal, is one of Africa’s smallest and poorest countries, stretching about 480 km
                     long and up to 50 km wide. It has around 80 km of coastline and 200 km of protected shoreline along the Gambia River,
                     with savannahs and low hills reaching 53 meters high beyond the floodplain. Classified as a Least Developed Country, its
                     population is expected to reach 2.72 million in 2024—double that of 2000—with 63% under age 25. Poverty affected
                     53.4% in 2020 (up from 45.8% in 2019), and 21% live in extreme poverty ($2.15/day benchmark).
                     The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project (WASAP) targets water and sanitation gaps in Greater Banjul Area (GBA),
                     where urbanization is 66% and over 60% of the country’s people reside. Kanifing and Brikama districts have the most
                     poverty, with informal settlements outpacing infrastructure like housing, roads, and water. Though 11.5% of the
                     territory is water (20% wetlands), resources are underutilized, and the Gambia River’s salinity restricts use.
                     WASAP will develop deep aquifer water resources, build a Brikama East plant (24,000 m³/day capacity, 1,500 m³
                     reservoir), and expand supply to 60,000 unserved people. It will also improve sanitation by upgrading wastewater
                     systems in Banjul and Kotu, building a fecal sludge facility, installing climate-resilient rural latrines, and creating a
                     national onsite sanitation plan.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project activities will be carried out by the National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC), with support from
                     designated focal points within the participating sector ministries (Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry of Fisheries and
                     Water Resources (MoFWR)) who will help execute sanitation and water resource initiatives. Overall coordination of the
                     project will be managed by an existing Project Coordination Unit (PCU) within NAWEC, which will report to the Ministry
                     of Petroleum and Energy (MoPE). The PCU is staffed with E&S Experts that are experienced in implementing and
                     monitoring ESSs. The oversight of any potential E&S risks and impacts that could be related to the implementation of
                     the project’s activities will be monitored by the E&S experts already recruited by NAWEC. The CPU will determine the

                    Nov 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              The Gambia Water And Sanitation Project (P513113)



                     appropriateness of recruiting E&S assistant during the Appraisal stage. During the project preparation the E&S capacity
                     of the proposed implementing agency and other ministries that may be involved in the project implementation with
                     E&S implications such as the MoH and the MoFWR will be assessed. Based on the assessment, relevant mitigation
                     measures in form and manner satisfactory to the Association will be proposed. All the actions related to E&S
                     institutional arrangements will be well reflected in the ESCP. The PCU will work in close collaboration with the national
                     environment agency (NEA) for ensuring compliance with national environmental laws, policies, and regulations.
                     Following the overview assessment recommendations, the Borrower’s capacity will be strengthened to support NEA to
                     develop and enforce guidance for the review, approval, and enforcement (including capacity building) of Environmental
                     Quality Standards Regulations (2025).

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial
                     The project’s environmental risk rating is identified as Substantial at the concept stage, and this may be revised or
                     confirmed during the appraisal stage once more technical details and the final destinations of the treated effluent and
                     sludge are known. The WASAP project aims to develop new, sustainable water sources, build a water treatment plant
                     in Brikama East with a 24,000 m³ daily capacity, a 1,500 m³ storage reservoir, and distribute water to communities
                     (about 60,000 people) currently without NAWEC’s services. Additionally, WASAP will support sanitation
                     improvements in the Greater Banjul Area and rural regions, including rehabilitating existing wastewater infrastructure



Public Disclosure
                     (according to recommendations from feasibility studies for Banjul and Kotu), constructing a fecal sludge treatment
                     plant in Kotu, building climate-resilient latrines in rural zones to end open defecation, and developing a national
                     onsite sanitation master plan. Key environmental concerns during the project’s construction and operational phases
                     include: generation of solid and liquid waste (including hazardous materials like treatment chemicals and sanitation
                     sludge), risks of air and water pollution (such as effluent discharge and aquifer contamination), and soil pollution,
                     especially from construction runoff, improper waste disposal, or malfunctioning systems. OHS risks—such as injuries
                     and accidents during construction and equipment installation—are anticipated, alongside community health and
                     safety concerns.
                                                                                                                                  Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project social risk rating is substantial at concept stage. Component 2 involves enhancements to sanitation
                     services, including urban efforts like Emergency Wastewater Management and a Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant, as well
                     as rural sanitation development. Component 3 aims to improve urban access to drinking water through projects
                     centered on water supply infrastructure. Primary risks are expected to include land acquisition, land use restrictions,
                     involuntary resettlement. There is also a potential for opposition to component 2, particularly concerning the fecal
                     sludge treatment plant, due to perceptions of fecal waste and concerns regarding proximity to communities. To a
                     large extent, the risk of conflict may increase if community engagement is not ensured in managing site selection,
                     incidents or accidents, community and worker grievances, and issues related to abuse, exploitation, and sexual
                     harassment. The key factors that can contribute to the risks are associated with implementation in densely populated
                     areas where homes, economic activities, and natural resources are closely situated. GBV risk is low, but Environment
                     and Social specialists should maintain close monitoring.


                    Nov 21, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              The Gambia Water And Sanitation Project (P513113)




                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      Project activities may generate E&S risks related to significant investments in water resources monitoring, sanitation
                      infrastructure, and urban water supply, spanning construction and rehabilitation. Activities like borehole
                      construction, aquifer exploitation, WTP rehabilitation, and fecal sludge management may impact habitats,
                      ecosystems, and biodiversity. Key E&S risks include loss of land, assets, OHS issues, livelihoods, etc. Borrower will
                      engage with key stakeholders and publicly disclose by appraisal IEAs for the rehabilitations of the FSTP and WTP and
                      during project implementation an ESIA and RP for the WTP construction to adequately mitigate potential E&S risks
                      and impacts once their location and scope are known. TA activities under C4 will comply with OESRC Advisory Note
                      on TA and the ESF. Community engagement, benefit sharing, and mitigation measures; GBV mitigation and HSE plans
                      and the CERC component E&S requirements will be considered.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. During the Concept stage, the Borrower will develop a draft SEP that addresses
                      considerations related to the Grievance Mechanism (GM). The SEP will include consultations with administrative,
                      local, and national authorities concerning project design and orientation. These consultations will be expanded to
                      obtaining stakeholder feedback and identifying opportunities for future engagement, especially regarding sensitive


Public Disclosure
                      topics such as fecal sludge treatment. Emphasis will be placed on ensuring that consultations are inclusive, accessible,
                      and appropriate to the context. The Borrower will engage a facilitation firm to implement the SEP, with particular
                      emphasis on supporting the sanitation program and promoting reforms in the water sector (components 2, 3 and 4).

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The project national framework to manage E&S risks related to Labor will be used. Following, the OA
                      recommendations an LMP is not required to manage the risks associated with project activities. However, compliance
                      will be monitored as part of the regular implementation. Project related labor management procedures should be
                      covered in the POM and the ESCP in line with relevant national laws and regulations to fill the gap. Direct, Contracted,
                      and Primary Supply Workers are involved. Major labor risks include OHS hazards from infrastructure work, machinery
                      use, and exposure to hazardous materials. Additional risks involve employment terms, labor influx, and protection of
                      vulnerable workers. For SEA/SH risks, the Borrower’s Framework and Article 179 of the Labour Act (2023) apply,
                      requiring private employers to prevent sexual harassment. Codes of Conduct defining and prohibiting SEA/SH, with
                      incident procedures, must be included in ESMPs and Operations Manuals.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      The ESS is relevant due to the project's substantial construction and operational activities, which will utilize resources
                      and produce waste and emissions. It covers developing and upgrading water supply and sanitation infrastructure—
                      such as boreholes, WTP, reservoirs, and sewerage systems—posing risks of water pollution. ESS3 emphasizes energy
                      and water efficiency, management of all waste types, and control of air emissions. A detailed water balance will need


                    Nov 21, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              The Gambia Water And Sanitation Project (P513113)



                      to be developed to be fully compliant with ESS3 as far as groundwater resources, coastal and deep aquifers and
                      surface water resources are concerned. The project aims to reduce GHG emissions by integrating energy-efficient
                      technologies and renewable energy, including solar-powered boreholes therefore, an estimate of gross GHG emission
                      resulting from the project to establish a baseline will be considered. The project will comply with Bank’s requirements
                      on procurement of solar PVs if its use is confirmed.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                 Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant: given the physical footprint associated with project’s activities along with the proximity to densely
                      populated and vulnerable communities, and the potential for both routine and non-routine risks. Key anticipated risks
                      include community exposure to construction hazards, increased traffic, potential contamination of water sources,
                      disease transmission, and impacts from labor influx. The project will require comprehensive assessment and
                      management of these risks, with mitigation measures and monitoring detailed in an Environmental and Social
                      Management Plan (ESMP) and specific Community Health and Safety (H&S) instruments, to be developed during
                      project preparation and implementation. The SEA/SH risk rating is moderate, the BF will be used regarding the
                      obligations for employers to prohibit and handle sexual harassment in the workplace.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                     Relevant

                      To justify the Substantial risk rating of the project, the Task team identified land acquisition, land use restrictions, and
                      involuntary resettlement as primary risks. There is no clear due diligence proposed under ESS5 to ensure project
                      compliance during preparation. The ESRS should clearly indicate under this ESS whether a Resettlement Plan of one




Public Disclosure
                      of the key activities will be prepared prior to Board approval or all sites’ specific mitigation measures will be
                      determined during project implementation.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                      Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant: the project involves significant interventions in water resources management, including the
                      development and rehabilitation of water supply infrastructure, WTP and FSTP, and sanitation services in both urban
                      and rural areas. The project area encompasses the GBA and surrounding towns, which include wetlands, aquifers, and
                      river basins of ecological significance. Key activities such as borehole construction, aquifer exploitation, WTP
                      rehabilitation, and FSTP have the potential to adversely impact aquatic ecosystems, biodiversity and natural habitats
                      including habitats fragmentation, a CHA will be prepared prior to appraisal, and the outcome will define the relevant
                      mitigation measures to be developed using the mitigation hierarchy approach. Based on that, ESIAs to be prepared
                      during the implementation phase will screen and assess the extent to which biodiversity and natural resources
                      settings will be impacted and the necessary measures that need to be included in ESMPs.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                  Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      There are no Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities in the project
                      area.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                           Relevant


                    Nov 21, 2025                                                                                                          Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               The Gambia Water And Sanitation Project (P513113)



                      The project national framework to manage E&S risks related to Cultural heritage will be used. Project related CH
                      procedures should be covered in the POM and the ESCP in line with relevant national laws and regulations to fill the
                      gap. Civil works for water and sanitation may uncover unknown cultural heritage during excavation. NEA requires
                      National Center of Arts and Culture (NCAC) participation in the ESIA committee, and all provisions regarding cultural
                      heritage—including referrals to NCAC—must be included in ESMPs and reflected in the ESCP.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant to the project as there are no financial intermediaries likely to be involved in project
                      implementation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                         OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         Yes
                         OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                         Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                         In Part
                         This project will fully use the Borrowers’ Framework for ESS 2 and ESS8 and part of the BF framework for all others
                         relevant ESS based on potential E&S risks and impacts associated with project activities. Following the overview



Public Disclosure
                         assessment, relevant measures to fill the gap will be recommended.


                         Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                         The use of a common approach is not anticipated.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     •         ESCP
                     •      Draft Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the construction of the WTP in Brikama East
                     •         Draft Initial Environmental Assessments for the construction of the WTP in Brikama East
                     •      A draft of Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) including a project level Grievance Mechanism (GM)
                     •         A draft Resettlement Plan (RP) related to the subcomponent 2.1.1.
                     •      Critical Habitat Assessment
                     •      A detailed water balance assessment
                     •         Due diligence under OP 7.50




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                    Nov 21, 2025                                                                                                         Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               The Gambia Water And Sanitation Project (P513113)



                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Sylvestre Bea                        Title:          Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  sbea@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                          Sylvestre Bea

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                 Ahmed Fall

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                        Mamadou Moustapha Ndoye




Public Disclosure




                    Nov 21, 2025                                                                                             Page 8 of 8
