Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                        Project Information Document (PID)

Public Disclosure Authorized



            _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Nov-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01551




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                        Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                                                                                      Resilient Action for
                                                                                                                      Development and Disaster
                          India                          SOUTH ASIA                    P513815
                                                                                                                      Recovery Himachal
                                                                                                                      Pradesh
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         07-Nov-2025                   15-Dec-2025                    Urban, Resilience and Land
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Department of Revenue
                                                         (DM-Cell), Government of




_For Official Use Only_
                                                         Himachal Pradesh;
                          India
                                                         Directorate of Energy;
                                                         Public Works Department;
                                                         Jal Shakti Vibhag

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          To support resilient disaster recovery and livelihoods, and increase state capacities for risk-informed development.

                          Components
                          Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Reforms for Resilience
                          Component 2: Resilient Infrastructure and Livelihoods Recovery
                          Component 3: Implementation Support
                          Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                             412.50


                                                                                                                                                 Page 1



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                     The World Bank
                                     Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                                Total Financing                                                                                                                   412.50
                                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                                   250.00
                                Financing Gap                                                                                                                        0.00

                              DETAILS
                                World Bank Group Financing
                                  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                                   250.00
                                Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                  Commercial Financing                                                                                                           100.00
                                     Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                                           100.00
                                  Counterpart Funding                                                                                                              62.50
                                     National Government                                                                                                           62.50




_For Official Use Only_
                              @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          High


                              Decision
                              The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                              Other Decision (as needed)

                              B. Introduction and Context
                              Country Context
                              1.       As India’s economy continues to grow and poverty declines1, disaster risks increasingly challenge
                              developmental gains, particularly in vulnerable states located in the Himalayan range. The increasing frequency and
                              severity of extreme weather events such as cloudbursts2, floods, debris flows and landslides, especially pose substantial
                              threats across the complex terrains of the India’s hill states, particularly during the monsoon season. These areas are
                              characterized by a young and fragile geology, marked by steep and unstable slopes and narrow floodplains that provide
                              limited flat land—often used for construction but highly exposed to floods and debris flows. In addition to flash floods,
                              landslides and debris flows frequently triggered by cloudbursts, the Himalaya region is also exposed to earthquakes,
                              glacier lake outburst floods (GLOFs), avalanches, droughts and forest fires.

                          1
                              World Bank. Poverty & Equity Brief (PEB), Oct 2025.
                          2 According to the India Meteorological Department (IMD) a cloudburst is a sudden rainfall of 100 mm or more within an hour over a small area.



                                                                                                                                                                       Page 2



                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)


                           2.       Himachal Pradesh (HP) faces a growing threat to its development gains and poverty reduction from recurring
                           natural hazards and extreme weather events that disrupt economic activity, livelihoods, and jobs. HP is a northern
                           Indian state in the western Himalayas, with around 7 million people, an area of 55,673 km² and an economy relying
                           mainly on agriculture, tourism, and hydropower. Multidimensional poverty in HP fell3 from 8 percent in 2015–16 to 5
                           percent in 2019–21—equivalent to nearly 200,000 fewer people living in multidimensional poverty. Over the past three
                           years, the state has experienced over 66 cloudbursts, 234 landslides, and 121 flash floods, resulting in losses exceeding
                           US$1.5 billion4. Recovery needs are estimated to be over six times the state’s five-yearly (2021-2026) allocation under
                           the State Disaster Risk Management Funds; even with additional support from the National Disaster Risk Management
                           Fund, these damages have been only partially addressed. Damages to roads, water supply, and energy infrastructure
                           consistently comprise about 80 percent of losses, disrupting connectivity, service delivery, and market access in remote
                           districts such as Chamba, Kullu, Mandi, and Una. Agriculture, horticulture, and tourism—employing over half the state’s
                           workforce—are particularly affected, leading to widespread income instability, seasonal job losses, and outmigration
                           from rural areas. With limited insurance coverage and constrained fiscal space, repeated recovery expenditure diverts
                           resources from development investments and undermines sustainable job creation and growth.

                           Sectoral and Institutional Context
                           3.      Cloudbursts, flash floods, debris flows, and landslide incidents triggered by heavy monsoon rains (June-
                           September, 2025) caused extensive damage across all 12 districts of HP, resulting in over 486 fatalities and losses




_For Official Use Only_
                           estimated at US$653 million. Transport infrastructure was the most impacted (US$362.63 million in damages), followed
                           by water, sanitation and irrigation (US$177.25 million) and power infrastructure (US$35.8 million), adding to the
                           accumulated damages from events during previous years. Around 20 percent of the state’s road network was affected,
                           more than 4900 water supply schemes were damaged, and over 15 hydroelectric projects5 (HEP) sustained losses. Given
                           the scale and cumulative nature of the recovery needs, available funding has largely been absorbed by urgent repairs
                           and restoration of essential services. While these efforts have been crucial, much of the damage remains unaddressed,
                           heightening the vulnerability of infrastructure systems. The recurring nature of such losses underscores systemic
                           weaknesses in infrastructure planning, design, maintenance and recovery6 and highlights the need to embed resilience
                           standards across the asset life cycle.
                           4.       Employment and livelihoods across key economic sectors suffered severe direct and indirect impacts. The
                           districts with the highest losses i.e., Chamba, Shimla, Mandi, and Kullu are home to the state’s ‘apple belt’ and unique
                           crafts sectors such as weaving and metal works. Agricultural and horticultural sectors, which employ about 54 percent
                           of the workforce and contribute about 14 percent to state gross domestic product (GDP), faced severe losses from soil
                           erosion, pest outbreaks, and blocked transport routes. Apple farming, vital to over 150,000 small farming households,
                           was severely impacted by road closures preventing timely market access and rainfall-induced pest infestations
                           damaging crops7 and resulting in over US$260 million losses.8 Non-farm livelihoods, including artisanal workshops and
                           small-scale enterprises, experienced asset destruction such as damaged tools and stocks, compounded by disrupted
                           connectivity that stalled production and sales. Tourism, which contributes 7 percent to the state’s GDP and contributes
                           to around 14 percent direct and indirect employment9, came to a near standstill in major destinations such as Kullu,
                           Manali, Dharmshala due to unsafe roads and widespread service interruptions.

                          3 As measured by Niti Aayog’s MPI methodology, 2023.
                          4 GoHP, Department of Revenue – Disaster Management Cell.
                          5 Alternate term used for hydropower plants.
                          6 GoHP Final Memorandum of Damages Due to Flash Floods, Cloudbursts and Landslides during Monsoon Season 2025, 2024, 2023.
                          7 The New Indian Express, Himachal apple farmers in dire straits as monsoon wreaks havoc.
                          8 Down To Earth, Floods in Himachal seal roads, leading to losses for apple farmers.
                          9 Himachal Pradesh Economic Survey 2022-2023.



                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)


                           5.       The increasing severity and adverse effects of disaster events in HP reveals the need for a systemic approach
                           to preventing, mitigating, and financial protection against disaster risk. Climate change has resulted in variations in
                           the occurrence of natural hazards in recent years, and these are projected to continue. The monsoon is expected to
                           become more intense and erratic in the Hindu Kush Himalayas (HKH), with heavier rainfall concentrated in shorter
                           periods, increased intra-seasonal variability, and prolonged dry spells10. Glaciers, snow cover, and permafrost are
                           projected to decline substantially, altering the seasonal patterns of meltwater contributions to river flows, destabilizing
                           high mountain slopes and heightening the risk of GLOFs11. In combination with recent disasters caused by sudden
                           cloudbursts, evolving landslide hotspots and high velocity debris flows, this shows an urgent need for hazard zonation,
                           delineation of high exposure locations and risk-informed land use planning. Despite recurring events, state capabilities
                           are limited for hazard monitoring; for early warnings for infrastructure operations (e.g., of water intake structures); and
                           for preventing unsafe construction in high-risk areas. Hazard analytics and network risk assessments are essential to
                           support HP’s deteriorating public service systems, by identifying vulnerabilities and addressing them. Further, despite
                           severe financing constraints, disaster risk is primarily borne by the state without pre-arranged post-disaster financing.
                           Given the scale of accumulated losses, HP urgently needs a diversified disaster risk financing strategy that: (a) meets
                           the financing requirements for climate-proofing vulnerable assets, particularly the extensive housing stock and (b)
                           manages the state’s growing contingent liabilities arising from repeated housing damage, escalating disaster-induced
                           losses in productive sectors such as horticulture (especially apple farming), and recurrent damage to public
                           infrastructure.




_For Official Use Only_
                           6.       The proposed emergency operation, Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery in Himachal
                           Pradesh (READY-HP), aims to support resilient recovery from the impacts of the 2025 monsoon season through
                           building back better while strengthening the state’s capacity for risk-informed and climate-resilient development.
                           READY-HP will assist the Government of Himachal Pradesh (GoHP) in restoring key public infrastructure in the three
                           most affected sectors i.e., transport, water and sanitation, and power while revitalizing livelihoods and employment
                           and advancing a comprehensive disaster risk financing and insurance (DRFI) strategy. Achieving these goals requires
                           investments that simultaneously deliver (a) the immediate recovery and reconstruction of critical assets, (b)
                           institutional capacity-building for systemic risk reduction, and (c) robust financial mechanisms for disaster resilience.
                           The design of READY-HP draws from the experience of previous recovery projects recognizing that post-disaster
                           contexts offer a unique window of opportunity for institutional reforms and long-term resilience building. Central to
                           this approach are more and better jobs: livelihood recovery will support sustained better job opportunities across
                           agriculture, tourism, small enterprises—helping restore incomes and build a more resilient local economy; more reliable
                           public services (transport, water and energy) will reduce disruptions and impacts on jobs and livelihoods; and
                           reconstruction activities will generate temporary employment, providing immediate income support and minimizing
                           disruptions to the labor market in the short-term.
                           7.       The proposed operation is consistent with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) Fiscal Year (FY) 18–22
                           discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on September 20, 2018 (Report No. 126667-IN) and extended to FY25
                           by the corresponding Performance and Learning Review dated November 20, 2023. It aligns with Focus Area 1 of the
                           CPF on Resource Efficient Growth by improving resilience to climate change, specifically by improving “disaster risk
                           management” (Objective 1.5) through capacity enhancement of state institutions for resilience mainstreaming, and
                           making “transport systems […] climate and disaster resilient” (Objective 2.3) through resilient infrastructure
                           reconstruction. Furthermore, the project contributes to “enable more quality jobs for women” through the
                           diversification of rural livelihoods supporting women in vulnerable employments. The Project is aligned with the India
                           Systematic Country Diagnostic 2018 (Report no: 126284-IN) which identifies climate change and the impact of natural

                          10 Krishnan, R. et al. 2019: The Hindu Kush Himalaya Assessment. Chapter 3 - Unravelling Climate Change in the Hindu Kush Himalaya: Rapid Warming.

                          in the Mountains and Increasing Extremes.
                          11 Gurung, D.R. 2019: The Hindu Kush Himalaya Assessment. Chapter 11 - Disaster Risk Reduction and Building Resilience in the Hindu Kush Himalaya.



                                                                                                                                                                       Page 4



                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)


                           hazards on public infrastructure as a risk to India’s advance, and states that “[a]ddressing risks that involve long-lived
                           assets may require action now”. The Project is consistent with India’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)
                           submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and Long-term Low-Carbon Development
                           Strategy (2022).


                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           8.     To support resilient disaster recovery and livelihoods, and increase state capacities for risk-informed
                           development.


                               Key Results
                          9.     The Project will measure progress toward the PDO via the following proposed indicators:
                                 a) People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people, disaggregated by gender and youth)
                                 b) Line departments integrating resilience analytics into risk-informed decision making (Number)
                                 c) People benefiting from new or better jobs (Number of people, disaggregated by gender)




_For Official Use Only_
                               D. Project Description
                          10.     The project design combines critical recovery investments in the most-affected infrastructure and livelihoods
                          sectors with measures to create an enabling ecosystem for private capital mobilization, alongside long-term institutional
                          reforms for resilience building. Component 1 focuses on strengthening institutional capacity and systems for resilience,
                          while Component 2 supports recovery, rehabilitation, and reconstruction investments.
                          11.    Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Reforms for Resilience. To systematically address Himachal
                          Pradesh’s growing disaster and climate risks, this component aims at strengthening institutional capacity for resilient
                          recovery and risk-informed development. Sub-component 1.1. will strengthen capacity in three selected public services
                          departments and sub-component 1.2. will enhance systems, information, and capacity at the state level.
                          12.      Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Strengthening and Reforms of State Infrastructure Departments. This sub-
                          component focuses on strengthening the Public Works Department’s (PWD), Jal Shakti Vibhag’s (JSV), and the Directorate
                          of Energy’s (DoE) institutional capacity, technical expertise and systems for resilient recovery, and more broadly, risk-
                          informed planning, management and operation of public service systems. To achieve this, dedicated resilience cells with
                          clearly defined roles and responsibilities will be established in PWD, JSV and DoE, by assignment of current staff to this
                          specific role. These cells will be involved in the development of planned hazard and risk analytics, will take ownership of
                          finalized models and hazard/risk information and will support the departments with the application of this information.
                          The process will be accompanied with targeted training and hands-on capacity building.
                          13.    This sub-component will also support the development of guidelines for resilient planning, design, construction,
                          and maintenance across key asset type, i.e. bridges, culverts, road, water supply, irrigation and sanitation, power
                          generation, transmission, and distribution infrastructure as well as associated slope stabilization and erosion protection
                          measures. These guidelines will be both informed by and applied to the rehabilitation and reconstruction of assets



                                                                                                                                                  Page 5



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)


                          financed under Component 2 and consolidated for use beyond READY-HP to inform resilient reconstruction for
                          infrastructure development across the state.
                          14.      Sub-component 1.2: Institutional Strengthening and Reforms at State level. This sub-component supports
                          institutional strengthening at the state level for resilient recovery, including strengthening financial resilience of the State,
                          and risk mitigation across departments and districts. Key activities include: (a) developing flood plain zoning across select
                          basins, demarcating flood-prone zones, and updating general development control regulations in both urban and rural
                          contexts to ensure construction occurs in safe locations; (b) developing a flood early warning system (EWS) to enable early
                          action for protecting power and other critical infrastructure as well as vulnerable population—building on existing sensors,
                          forecasts and modeling systems; and (c) establishing a robust institutional framework for DRFI, including the formulation
                          of a state DRFI strategy and conducting assessment of financing options such as insurance for private assets (e.g., housing)
                          with incentives for retrofitting, livelihood protection instruments (e.g., for apple farmers), state-level sovereign risk
                          transfers. Pilot testing of selected financial products and mechanisms will be undertaken in collaboration with private
                          sector, based on the assessment results. Based on the sector and instrument selected for pilots, this activity will include
                          outreach and public awareness of insurance products and capacity building for the public sector institutions on risk
                          transfer.
            15. Component 2: Resilient Infrastructure and Livelihoods Recovery. This component will support the resilient recovery of




_For Official Use Only_
                key public services, namely transport (roads and bridges); public buildings; water, sanitation and irrigation; and power
                supply, considering the impact of climate change on hazard intensities and frequencies. Assets critical for service provision
                and sites with high risk will be prioritized to develop best practices using innovative solutions. The list of areas where the
                activities under the project will be implemented in the State of Himachal will be specified in the Project Operations
                Manual, selected in accordance with World Bank policies. Overall efforts under this component are expected to have a
                positive impact on livelihoods by reducing the impact of future natural hazards exacerbated by climate change, protecting
                and creating jobs, ensuring continued access to transportation, water and electricity.
                          16.     Sub-component 2.1: Resilient reconstruction of roads, bridges and public buildings. This sub-component will
                          support the Public Works Department (PWD) to reconstruct and improve priority transport corridors, including roads with
                          requisite slope stabilization, drainage, culvert improvements and road safety considerations; bridges with erosion
                          protection; bridle bridges; and critical public buildings such as hospitals, schools and multi-purpose relief shelters.
                          17.     Sub-component 2.2: Resilient reconstruction of water supply, sanitation and irrigation. This sub-component will
                          support reconstruction and improvement of water supply, sewage/sanitation and irrigation schemes, aiming at addressing
                          damages and integrating resilience to ensure end-to-end functioning and service. Investments will be prioritized and
                          designed using a system-based approach to ensure that they: (a) are multi-hazard risk-informed both in terms of siting
                          and design; (b) address the full service chain – from intake to the end users; and (c) deliver measurable improvements in
                          service quality, including continuous water supply, enhanced monitoring, and effective water treatment.
                          18.      Sub-component 2.3: Resilient reconstruction of power supply infrastructure. This sub-component will focus on
                          repairs, reconstruction and other interventions to restore and strengthen power supply, transmission and distribution.
                          This will be complemented by the procurement of emergency power restoration systems to enable faster responses to
                          future power disruptions. The sub-component will also support the installation of 500 kilowatts solar power projects in 30
                          panchayats as part of the “Green Panchayat” scheme. This approach contributes to the decentralization of power
                          production and creation of system redundancies that ensure power supply in case of network disruptions.




                                                                                                                                                      Page 6



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                     The World Bank
                                     Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)


                          19.     Sub-component 2.4: Resilient livelihoods. This sub-component will strengthen existing and establish new value
                          chains for resilient livelihoods in the farm, non-farm and rural tourism sectors across 12 business segments12 by targeting
                          key bottlenecks. Technical Service Agencies (TSA) will be contracted for the different business segments, to support the
                          overall process of end-to-end value chain strengthening, starting with evaluations of the current products and services
                          versus consumer interest. Subsequently, the TSA will identify, design and implement key interventions for each value
                          chain including: (a) establishing sustainable community business organizations (CBO) to organize artisans, producers,
                          farmers and service providers (the formation of CBOs will leverage existing networks and groups from the State Rural
                          Livelihoods Mission and prioritizing disaster affected communities and areas); (b) providing technical support for product
                          design, development, innovation and creation of strategic market linkages, while incorporating disaster risk
                          considerations; (c) delivering market-led trainings and skill upgrading to tailor products and services to consumer interest;
                          (d) improving access to finance; (e) facilitating participation in marketing and trade events; (f) building pipeline of market
                          orders for CBOs; (g) supporting business continuity planning; and (h) strengthening disaster preparedness capacities. The
                          value chain development will also include a grant facility accessible to CBOs (not individuals) to finance critical activities
                          such as exposure visits, procurement of raw materials, development of common facility centers e.g. for production
                          processes, infrastructure improvements, product innovation etc.
                          20.       Component 3: Implementation Support. This component will finance staff and consultants in the project
                          management unit and project implementation units, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), communications, training, and




_For Official Use Only_
                          facilitation of exchange and learning across the project. This includes Project Management and Technical Consultants
                          (PMTC), who will provide regional and global expertise to advise on tailored solutions, transfer of knowledge, and build
                          capacity in Implementing Agencies (IAs)13, particularly in the resilience cells. It will also facilitate exchange and learning
                          across the project and between the implementing agencies.
                          1.




                          21.     Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response. This zero-cost component (no initial funding allocation) enables
                          rapid reallocation of funds from balances of other project components for emergency response and recovery in case of
                          catastrophic events.


                                @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                                Legal Operational Policies                                                                 Triggered?
                                Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                Yes
                                Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                          No


                               Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          22. Environmental and Social (E&S) risk is High. The environmental risk rating is High due to the significant potential for
                              adverse environmental impacts stemming from the (a) project’s geographic setting in a fragile disaster-prone
                              mountainous terrain with ecologically sensitive areas/features; (b) nature of its infrastructure interventions; and (c)
                              limited familiarity/prior experience of the implementing agencies on the application and implementation of risk

                          12 Kullu Weaves, Chamba Embroidery, Chamba Footwear, Pine Needle Crafts, Chamba Metal Crafts, Wool Products, Apple Products, Seabuckthorn

                          Berry Products, Turmeric Products, Hazelnut Products, Honey Products, Community Based Tourism
                          13 Term used to refer to the PMU and PIUs of the project.



                                                                                                                                                                Page 7



                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)


                              management requirements of the environmental and social framework. The social risk rating is High due to (a) taking
                              of private land and assets at certain locations for planned works, permanent and temporary displacement; (b)
                              difficulty in identification of owners as land parcels have either got washed away and/or damaged; (c) impacts on
                              livelihood due to land take, restrictions on access to/use of forest land and resources and also construction works that
                              are likely to be prolonged in duration; (d) risks relating to labor, labor influx, community health and safety, sexual
                              exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment risks as much of the construction labor is sourced from other states; (e)
                              possible exclusion of vulnerable groups from such recovery efforts due to inadequate stakeholder engagement and
                              communication; and (f) lack of familiarity and weak capacity of some of the PIUs. At project appraisal, Stakeholder
                              Engagement Plan and an Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) have been prepared and disclosed, while
                              other E&S documents (as stated in the ESCP) will be prepared within two (2) months of Project effectiveness date and
                              disclosed on websites of the PMU and three PIUs. These will include ESMF, Labour Management Plan (LMP),
                              Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and SEA/SH risk mitigation plan. The
                              ESCP lists the following key commitments: i) assigning a senior official as a E&S nodal officer in the PMU; ii) preparation
                              and implementation of the afore-mentioned framework documents and assessment and mitigation plans; iii)
                              reporting of incidents/accidents with prescribed timelines; iv) operationalizing of Grievance Redressal Mechanisms,
                              v) for activities considered under retroactive financing and for any identified associated facilities, conducting of due
                              diligence to assess compliance and development of corrective action plans, if required; vi) develop and implement




_For Official Use Only_
                              capacity building action plan to develop capacity on various E&S and occupational health and safety (OHS) aspects.


                           E. Implementation
                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                          23.      The project will be implemented by a Project Management Unit (PMU) housed in the Disaster Management Cell
                          (DMC) in the Department of Revenue (DoR), along with three Project Implementation Units (PIUs). The PMU will be
                          responsible for overseeing day-to-day operations, project management, coordination, and reporting. In addition to its
                          management role, the PMU will also serve as the implementation unit for the Disaster Risk Management and livelihood
                          activities under sub-components 1.2 and 2.4. Three PIUs in PWD, DoE, and JSV will manage the recovery of critical
                          transport corridors and public buildings, power sector recovery, and water sector recovery and allied irrigation, sanitation
                          work (sub-components 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3). The PIUs will also focus on institutional strengthening to ensure resilience and
                          sustainability (sub-component 1.1). The PIUs will be supported by field-level teams for implementing works at the
                          intervention sites.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Anup Karanth
                             Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                             Melanie Simone Kappes
                             Disaster Risk Management Specialist


                                                                                                                                                    Page 8



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)


                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           India

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Department of Revenue (DM-Cell), Government of Himachal Pradesh; Directorate of Energy; Public Works
                                 Department; Jal Shakti Vibhag

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL




_For Official Use Only_
                          Task Team Leader(s):                   Anup Karanth, Melanie Simone Kappes

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:

                          Country Director:




                                                                                                                                     Page 9



                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
