Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 01-Dec-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01429




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
Gambia, The                    P513113                     The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
WESTERN AND CENTRAL            01-Apr-2026                 15-Jul-2026                   Water
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Finance and     National Water and
Financing (IPF)                Economic Affairs            Electricity Company
                                                           (NAWEC)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The development objective is to enhance access to water and sanitation services in selected regions of The Gambia
and to support policy and institutional sector reforms.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          30.00

  Total Financing                                                                                               30.00
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                 30.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  30.00
      IDA Grant                                                                                                 30.00


                                                                                                                    Page 1



                                                                                                         Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                         Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                          The review did authorize the preparation to continue




    Other Decision (as needed)

    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context
1. The Gambia is a low-income country that has faced significant challenges to reduce poverty, mainly due to high
population growth, rapid urbanization, and limited access to basic infrastructure. Approximately 21 percent of the
population lives in extreme poverty, measured against the international threshold of US$2.15 per person per day.1 The
gross domestic product (GDP) is projected to reach US$2.68 billion in 2024. With the anticipated population growth, this
would result in an estimated GDP per capita of US$985 (US$ current).2
2. Poverty in The Gambia is multi-dimensional and unequally distributed, reflecting limited education, poor access to
basic services, and widespread vulnerability to climate risks. Poverty is more common in rural areas, particularly in the
Northeast. However, a larger share of people living in poverty is found in the urbanized areas of the Southwest, which
have a higher population density. The two districts with the largest numbers of residents living in poverty are Kanifing and
Brikama, where informal settlements have outpaced the development of basic infrastructure and services, including
housing, roads, electricity, water, and drainage.
3. The Gambia is highly vulnerable to climate change—it is in the top third of most vulnerable countries according to
the ND-GAIN Index on climate vulnerability. The country is facing an increase in climate hazards, which are expected to
worsen due to climate change. Dry spells and heat extremes are becoming more frequent, with consecutive dry days
projected to rise from 135 to 160 per year by 2025. Additionally, the number of days with temperatures exceeding 40°C
is expected to increase from 60 to 100 by 20503. High-intensity rainfall events are anticipated to grow by up to 20%,
particularly for 1-day rainfall in the Upper and Central River Regions by 20504.
4. The rise in extreme heat days is likely to lead to a consistent increase in drought risk and a doubling of wildfire risks
across the country. Recent droughts in 2012 and 2018 have already resulted in worsened food security due to decreased
fodder availability and lower crop yields, negatively impacting both human health and the economy5. Additionally,
approximately one-third of the country’s surface area is located at or below 10 meters above sea level, and between 10

3
  Global Center on Adaptation. 2025. Climate Hazard Assessment Integrated Adaptation Options for Transport, Energy and Water Sectors in The
Gambia
3
  Global Center on Adaptation. 2025. Climate Hazard Assessment Integrated Adaptation Options for Transport, Energy and Water Sectors in The
Gambia
3
  Global Center on Adaptation. 2025. Climate Hazard Assessment Integrated Adaptation Options for Transport, Energy and Water Sectors in The
Gambia
4 Ibid.
5 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (2022), The Gambia: A diagnostic exercise conducted by the climate resilient food systems alliance.




                                                                                                                                                              Page 2



                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)


to 20 percent is susceptible to seasonal or daily flooding. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Representative
Concentration Pathway 8.5 projects that by 2050, The Gambia may experience a sea level rise of 35 centimeters, with
coastal flooding continuing to pose a significant threat to infrastructure.
    Sectoral and Institutional Context
5. The management of the water sector in The Gambia is fragmented with overlapping institutional responsibilities.
The Ministry of Fisheries and Water Resources (MFWR) oversees the overall management of water resources as well as
rural water supply. On-site sanitation-related responsibilities are managed under the Ministry of Health and Social
Welfare. Meanwhile, the National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC) is responsible for providing water supply and
sanitation services (wastewater management) to urban centers and provincial growth centers with populations exceeding
10,000 inhabitants, in addition to generating, transmitting, and distributing electricity. NAWEC reports to the Ministry of
Petroleum and Energy, and there is no direct reporting line between NAWEC and MFWR. This lack of direct communication
complicates coordination regarding sector policies and investments. Additionally, the government has recently decided
to separate NAWEC's water and electricity operations. A committee has been established to create a roadmap for this
separation. This roadmap is expected to suggest reform options to address the major shortcomings in the legal, regulatory,
and governance frameworks, as well as the existing gaps in planning, financing, and maintenance of water and sanitation
infrastructure.
6. The Gambia has abundant water resources that are not fully utilized for economic gain. About 11.5 percent of the
country's surface area is covered by water, and 20 percent is classified as wetlands. Despite the abundance of water
resources estimated to 8.5 billion m3 per year, their economic utilization remains both limited and inefficient, with an
overall water-use efficiency of $13.0/m³, compared to $24.4/m³ in peer countries across the region6.
7. The Gambia shares the Senegal-Mauritanian Aquifer Basin (SMAB) with Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania, and Senegal.
This significant transboundary groundwater resource, which could locally be high in fluoride, was explored in the early
1980s but has since been largely neglected. Recently, the countries sharing the SMAB have expressed their willingness to
cooperate in managing the transboundary aquifer, leading to increasing regional effort to identify common challenges
and establish a formal cooperation mechanism. The dialogue initiated in 2019 resulted in the approval of a roadmap for
creating a joint vision and a long-term cooperation program. Subsequently, a Regional Working Group (RWG) was formed,
comprising official representatives from the four countries, as well as from the Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du
Fleuve Gambie (OMVG) and Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du Fleuve Senegal (OMVS). Currently, a draft cooperation
agreement is being developed, and The Gambia remains committed to these regional efforts, aiming to sign the
cooperation agreement by the end of 2026.
8. The transboundary Gambia River, which flows through the country, has a basin that spans much of the entire
nation. However, the water is too saline for effective use. The basin is managed by the OMVG, established in 1978, which
coordinates water resources management across its four member countries: Senegal, The Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, and
Guinea.
9. Water resources management in The Gambia is currently inadequate (weak legal and institutional frameworks,
limited financing, enforcement, and monitoring capacity) which undermines the country's resilience to future climate
change-related shocks. While surface water resources are well understood due to studies conducted by the OMVG, there
has been limited research on groundwater resources, with no comprehensive understanding of coastal and deep aquifers.
Advancing exploration in this area will be crucial to strengthening resilience and supporting adaptation to climate shocks,
including droughts and declining groundwater levels.



6
    Data source: Water Security Diagnostic Dashboard 2.0

                                                                                                                       Page 3



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)


10. Groundwater pollution in The Gambia is a significant issue. The combined effects of sea level rise due to climate
change and the lowering of the shallow groundwater table—caused by climate change-exacerbated changes in recharge
patterns, droughts, soil sealing, and increased groundwater demand—have accelerated the inland intrusion of saline water
into the shallow sand aquifer. Consequently, several of NAWEC’s coastal boreholes have been decommissioned, further
reducing water availability. The Department of Water Resources within the MFWR monitors 38 boreholes, 20 percent of
which are affected by saltwater intrusion, compromising water quality and availability for domestic and agricultural use.
Additionally, inadequate sewerage infrastructure and leaking septic tanks, as well as urban contaminants such as direct
wastewater discharge, hydrocarbon storage, waste dumping sites, and industrial activities and the presence of agricultural
land within the Greater Banjul Area (GBA) have contributed to nitrate contamination of this shallow groundwater, resulting
in the closure of even more boreholes. Over the past decade, 25 out of the 99 boreholes constructed to access the shallow
sand aquifer for GBA’s water supply have been decommissioned. Industrial pollution is estimated to cost approximately
US$41.8 million annually and agricultural pollution accounts for around US$7.5 million in annual costs.
11. Water supply services are currently facing a significant crisis due to limited infrastructure and a growing population,
hindering the country's ability to meet the SDGs. NAWEC currently has a water production capacity of 147,000 cubic
meters (m³) per day, but the peak daily demand is approximately 252,000 m³. This creates a daily shortfall of 105,000 m³,
a situation that could worsen due to droughts intensified by climate change and rising future demand. As a result, only 48
percent of the population has access to safely managed drinking water services, with 68 percent in urban areas and just
10 percent in rural areas. Furthermore, the quality of these services is often compromised by frequent outages, leading
to neighborhoods experiencing water shortages that can last for days, weeks, or even months. NAWEC has been focused
on emergency measures to address these water cuts, limiting its ability to expand services in urban areas, which
experienced a growth rate ranging from 3.32 percent to 3.67 percent per year from 2019 to 2023. Many areas still lack
access to potable water entirely. Additionally, water quality is a significant concern, with high levels of nitrates, iron, and
salinity found in drinking water. Climate change is expected to exacerbate the issue, leading to further increases in drinking
water salinity due to rising sea levels that impacts coastal aquifers and the Gambia river.
12. Greater Banjul currently relies on boreholes that tap into a shallow sand aquifer; however, this water source is
vulnerable to contamination and decreasing in quantity due to the combined effects of climate change and competition
from domestic users. One potential solution is to exploit the deep Maastrichtian aquifer, which may represent a durable
water source for future needs. Moreover, there is an urgent need to enhance NAWEC's storage capacity, which is currently
estimated at only three hours a day. Out of 29 elevated tanks with an average water capacity of 630 m³, only eight are in
good condition, and storage capacity is further constrained by frequent power outages and insufficient pressure to fill the
tanks.
13. The National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC) is facing significant challenges that affect its operational
efficiency and financial sustainability. Key issues include high non-revenue water levels, which range from 38 percent to
42 percent, primarily due to aging infrastructure, inadequate maintenance practices, illegal connections, faulty meters,
and outdated systems. NAWEC needs significant support in tools and resources to manage its water operations effectively,
which account for approximately 10 percent of its revenue. Tools that are missing include a Geographic Information System
(GIS) for asset management, a hydraulic model for monitoring water flow, and organized hydraulic zones to ensure
systematic water delivery and to monitor water losses. Furthermore, the absence of sectorized networks and sufficient
bulk water meters complicates accurate measurement of water production and distribution throughout the network,
underscoring the need to establish district-metered areas (DMAs). In addition, the lack of GIS customer meter mapping
further complicates NRW monitoring. The company's financial viability is further hindered by non-cost-reflective tariffs
and limited access to funding, as well as capacity constraints in both technical and managerial areas.
14. The financial situation of NAWEC presents significant challenges, marked by fluctuating revenues, rising costs—
especially foreign exchange costs—and ongoing net losses. Although the utility's total revenue increased from GMD


                                                                                                                          Page 4



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)


3,296.3 million in 201453.1 million in 2023, production costs have remained high, accounting for approximately 60% of
total supply costs. These production costs along with high Non-Revenue Water in GBA (around 42%), representing
significant losses from leaks, theft, or billing inefficiencies, have become critical factors adversely affecting NAWEC's
operational efficiency and financial sustainability.
15. The deteriorating sewerage infrastructure and inadequate sanitation are creating a significant health and
environmental crisis. Currently, only 28 percent of the population has access to safely managed sanitation facilities, while
some individuals, particularly in rural areas, still practice open defecation. The country is facing challenges with
wastewater treatment, as 80 percent of wastewater is improperly treated, leading to groundwater contamination and
associated health risks. In Greater Banjul, there is only one wastewater treatment plant located in Kotu, which primarily
serves the hotels installed between Bakau and Fajara areas. Although stabilization ponds are in place, they are overloaded,
resulting in the regular release of inadequately treated sewage into natural water bodies. Additionally, the management
of fecal sludge is poor. Many residents in Greater Banjul who are not connected to the sewer system depend on poorly
constructed septic tanks or soak aways, which are often built in areas with high water tables. Upgrades to treatment
facilities are essential for protecting public health and ecosystems. The collection and disposal of fecal sludge in these
areas is infrequent and inadequate, leading to dumping in open spaces or into waterways adjacent to agricultural zones.
This mismanagement is already compromising water quality and availability, particularly due to nitrate contamination.
Furthermore, flooding events are expected to exacerbate the situation by increasing the volume of untreated sewage and
fecal sludge that leaches into groundwater.
16. Sanitation and Hygiene are lagging behind: Currently, only 28 percent of the population has safely managed
sanitation, 40 percent use unimproved sanitation facilities and less than 1 percent practice open defecation, particularly
in rural areas. There is an urgent need to develop a sector roadmap that identifies investment needs and reform
recommendations to achieve universal access by 2040 or 2050.
17. Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) service quality is inadequate: The Institutional framework ensuring water
quality standards are followed is robust but hampered by challenges such as inadequate enforcement mechanisms, limited
funding and a lack of coordination among agencies. The Gambia Public Utilities Regulatory Authority (PURA) has
established guidelines for minimum quality standards in water and sanitation services, which include requirements for
potable water production, distribution, and sewage management. Key mandates include maintaining a water pressure of
1.5 bars, limiting service interruptions to 12 hours monthly, and ensuring sewage discharge meets specific quality
standards (BOD7 of 30 mg/L and TSS8 of 50 mg/L). However, challenges persist, including limited monitoring capacity and
damage to infrastructure from extreme weather events such as floods. Additionally, droughts disrupt water availability and
changing precipitation patterns exacerbate water scarcity and contamination, creating further challenges for WASH
services. A 2019 survey indicates for instance that 73.2% of households had E. coli in their drinking water, highlighting
significant issues in water quality management.
18. The involvement of the private sector in water, sanitation, and electricity services in The Gambia has historically
been limited and often unsuccessful. The country’s water and electricity sectors have primarily been dominated by state
ownership, with little private sector participation. Efforts to establish public-private partnerships (PPPs) in these sectors
have faced challenges due to weak institutions that find it difficult to monitor and enforce complex contracts. The 2006
National Water Resources Policy provided a framework for integrated water management and aimed to encourage private
sector involvement. Additionally, the Electricity Act of 2005 opened the electricity generation and distribution markets to
private companies, which allowed Independent Power Producers (IPPs) to enter the sector, including a 25 MW plant that
was commissioned in 2008. However, attempts to privatize wastewater management were unsuccessful, as private


7
    Biochemical Oxygen Demand
8
    Total Suspended Solids

                                                                                                                         Page 5



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)


investors did not fulfill their commitments, leading to caution regarding future private sector engagements. Ongoing
reforms are aimed at restructuring the National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC) into separate entities for water
and electricity in order to improve governance and attract private investment. The Public Utilities Regulatory Authority
(PURA), established in 2001, now oversees service quality, tariff setting, and regulatory compliance; however, concerns
about its independence remain.
19. The Gambia faces significant gender disparities. In the 2024 Gender Inequality Index, the country ranked 110th out
of 146 nations, showing slight improvement from the previous year. Economically, women account for only 14.6% of paid
employment and hold just 10.3% of parliamentary seats, highlighting a significant gap in both representation and income.
In the water supply, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) sector, women are disproportionately affected by inadequate
infrastructure and service delivery. Only 31% of households have handwashing facilities, and 73% are at risk of fecal
contamination. This situation exposes women and girls to increased health risks and GBV, especially when they are forced
to travel long distances for water or sanitation.
20. Recent initiatives to improve WASH services in the country are supported by projects funded by a variety of
development partners, including the World Bank, the European Investment Bank (EIB), the French Development Agency
(AFD), the Saudi Fund for Development (SFD), and the European Union (EU). These projects focus on increasing water
production, upgrading infrastructure, and planning for urban water and sanitation through 2050. Key initiatives include
IDA-funded projects such as the Gambia Electricity Restoration and Modernization Project (GERMP - P173161), which
provides funding for short-term solutions to water shortages and infrastructure improvements. Another important
initiative is the Gambia Inclusive and Resilient Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (GIRAV - P180656), which
invests $23 million in WASH and irrigation to expand supply and enhance rural sanitation. It is projected that the combined
effects of these ongoing operations will increase water production to 213,740 m³/day by 2027. However, the demand for
water is expected to reach 300,000 m³/day by 2030, so the National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC) must continue
to improve its services to meet future needs, particularly in the face of drought risks. Current projects also support studies
and capacity-building initiatives aimed at improving the groundwater and water sector, including energy efficiency,
hydraulic modeling, wastewater management, and enhancing climate resilience.
21. To effectively address the above long-standing and complex challenges in the Gambia WASH sector, a
comprehensive, gradual, and multi-stakeholder approach is required. This approach should consider lessons learned
from past and ongoing interventions and integrate reforms in institutional, legal, and regulatory frameworks, enhance
infrastructure development, promote community engagement, prioritize climate resilience, and tackle current gaps in
planning, financing, and assets maintenance. There is an urgent need for investments and reforms to improve integrated
water resource management, protect water sources, and monitor water quality effectively. Additionally, it is essential to
enhance water and sanitation infrastructure, including the rehabilitation of outdated infrastructure. Supporting sector
reforms and financing is also crucial, including updating water legislation, resolving the institutional fragmentation issue,
encouraging private service provision, improving cost recovery policies, and ensuring proper maintenance of existing
infrastructure.
22. Furthermore, it is important to support the unbundling process of NAWEC’s water and electricity businesses, build
the capacity of the new water utility, and ensure its financial sustainability and operational efficiency. To facilitate these
efforts, a tariff study and the development of a financial model for the water sector—along with a comprehensive sector
roadmap and a financing platform—are necessary. The roadmap and findings from these studies will inform sector
reforms, enhance donor interventions and coordination, boost private sector participation, and improve service delivery.
23. This project aligns with the above approach and integrates targeted interventions to strengthen water resource
monitoring and conservation and expand equitable access to water and sanitation services in both urban and rural
communities. The design is guided by robust analytical work and lessons learned from previous Bank-funded initiatives
and complementary donor-supported projects.

                                                                                                                          Page 6



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)




 Relationship to CPF

24. The proposed project aligns closely with the World Bank Group’s objectives of ending extreme poverty and
sustainably enhancing shared prosperity on a livable planet. The project's activities will contribute to poverty reduction
through investments aimed at sustainably mobilizing and improving groundwater resources, enhancing access to water
and sanitation services and climate resilience, and reducing exposure to public health crises and associated adverse
impacts on economic and human needs. Special attention will be devoted to developing WASH (Water, Sanitation, and
Hygiene) infrastructure in specific areas that are home to the poorest and most vulnerable populations, particularly in
Greater Banjul Area (GBA) and surrounding towns, which are experiencing rapid urbanization and a shortage of WASH
services.

25. The project aligns with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) objective 2.1, which seeks to increase access to
sustainable energy and clean water as part of Focus Area 2: Enabling Inclusive and Resilient Private Sector-Driven Job
Creation. The primary goal of the project is to provide reliable access to resilient water and sanitation services in selected
strategic areas, thereby enhancing economic and human development outcomes. The implementation of the planned
activities will not only stimulate job creation but also encourage private sector involvement in the water and sanitation
sector. This will be partially achieved through a performance-based contract designed to address the issue of non-revenue
water (NRW), which adversely affects NAWEC's financial sustainability. Additionally, the project has the potential to
maximize financing for development in the management of urban wastewater and fecal sludge treatment infrastructure.

26. The project is aligned with The Gambia National Development Plan 2023 - 2027 (NDP 2023 - 2027). The pillars of the
NDP are: (i) building community resilience to address shocks and crisis; (ii) governance reform; (iii) macroeconomic
stability and growth; (iv) human capital development; (v) agriculture, fisheries, natural resources, environment and
climate change; (vi) empowerment, social inclusion and leaving no one behind; and (vii) energy, infrastructure and
connectivity.

27. Paris Alignment. The proposed project aligns with both The Gambia's and the World Bank's commitments to
addressing climate change. The activities outlined in the project will support the implementation of several key documents,
including The Gambia’s Second Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), the National Adaptation Program of Action on
Climate Change (2007), the National Climate Change Policy of The Gambia (2016), and The Gambia’s Long-Term Climate-
Neutral Development Strategy (2022). The Long-Term Strategy aims to achieve net-zero carbon emissions by 2050 while
enhancing adaptive capacities and resilience. A critical aspect of the Climate Change Policy is the promotion of climate-
resilient water and sanitation services. Nature-based solutions, such as floating systems (with ultrasound technology to
eliminate the majority of microalgae) for wastewater treatment in Kotu, will contribute to both mitigation and adaptation
efforts. These systems will decrease energy consumption and operational costs, reduce environmental impact, and ensure
compliance with discharge standards. Additionally, the use of solar-powered boreholes and energy-efficient pumps in
planned water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) interventions will contribute to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
Conversely, diesel pumps will not be used as primary energy sources where viable alternatives exist, both technically and
financially. Where practical, the water supply systems will consist of a single stage of pumping into storage tanks, with
distribution managed by gravity. No specific risks regarding the adaptation and mitigation aspects of the Paris Alignment
are flagged at this stage.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)



                                                                                                                          Page 7



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)


 The development objective is to enhance access to water and sanitation services in selected regions of The Gambia and
 to support policy and institutional sector reforms.

  Key Results (From PCN)

 A.   Key Results

 28. The achievement of the PDO will be measured through the following Results Indicators:

         •   Increase access to improved sanitation services in rural areas. Indicator: Number of people provided with
             access to improved sanitation facilities under the project.
         •   Increase access to safely managed drinking water supply services in selected GBA and surrounding towns.
             Indicator: Number of people provided with access to improved water sources under the project.
         •   Support sector reforms. Indicator: Adoption of a Concession Agreement for the new National Water Company
             along with a Contract Program.

 D. Concept Description
 29. Building on the gains of GERMP and GIRAV (which have provided critical support for immediate responses to water
 shortages and for WASH and irrigation services), this first standalone IPF with PBCs represents a strategic shift toward
 a long-term engagement in the water sector. In coordination with other donors, the World Bank, through this project,
 will help the Government lay the foundation for sustainable investments, institutional strengthening, and policy reforms
 that will underpin the sector's future development. It will finance priority water and sanitation infrastructure to help
 close the service deficit in the Greater Banjul Area, while anchoring broader reforms for improved governance. On the
 investment side, the project will enhance water supply reliability through the construction of new boreholes, treatment
 plants, and storage facilities, alongside the expansion of distribution networks and household connections, and the
 reduction of non-revenue water. On the sanitation side, it will invest in essential infrastructure such as a fecal sludge
 treatment plant and flood-resilient sanitation systems, complemented by stronger monitoring and management of
 water resources. Through its performance-based approach, the project will help address long-standing institutional
 fragmentation and strengthen NAWEC's efficiency. In doing so, it will lay the building blocks for a more resilient,
 financially sustainable water and sanitation sector, paving the way for deeper, sustained engagement in the years
 ahead.

30. Project Components: The activities of the project are organized into four components, which are described below.
Component 1: Improving Access to Urban Drinking Water Services (US$15M)

31. The objective of this subcomponent is to enhance access to drought resilient, improved water sources in GBA and
surrounding towns. Funded initiatives will involve constructing boreholes in both deep and shallow sand aquifers,
establishing a water treatment plant, and installing transmission lines and storage tanks. Additionally, the projects will
include expanding the distribution network, creating more water connections, and improving management of non-
revenue water.
Component 2: Improving Access to Sanitation Services (US$8M)
32. This Component aims to improve the sanitation infrastructure of the Greater Banjul Area (GBA), contributing to
improved living conditions, including better air and water quality, increased flood resilience as well as increased public


                                                                                                                       Page 8



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)


hygiene. Additionally, it seeks to tackle sanitation and hygiene challenges in vulnerable regions identified in the National
Sanitation and Hygiene Policy (NSHP), which advocates for universal access to safely managed sanitation by 2030.
33. Component 2.1: Urban sanitation (US$6.5M). This sub-component focuses on implementing the emergency and
short-term measures recommended in the recent wastewater study conducted under the GERMP-AF. The activities of this
sub-component include rehabilitating the sewer systems in Kotu and Banjul, as well as the wastewater treatment plant in
Kotu and the sea outfall in Banjul. Additionally, the Project will support the construction of a dedicated fecal waste
treatment plant in Kotu, located away from residential and tourism areas, benefiting approximately 153,000 households.
34. Component 2.2: Rural Sanitation Development (US$ 1.5 M). This sub-component aims to address sanitation and
hygiene challenges in vulnerable regions. This subcomponent will therefore finance the following activities: (i) construction
of 1,000 flood resilient improved household sanitation facilities in last mile Open Defecation communities (about 12,600
people); (ii) construction of 20 improved latrines in public places (selected health centers); (iii) conducting targeted
Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) Campaigns; (iv) strengthening handwashing facilities at household level; (v)
conducting behavior change, menstrual health, and hygiene promotion; (vi) supporting coordination between the Ministry
of Health, Department of Water Resources, and local councils; (vii) monitoring open defecation in communities using GIS
Tools; (viii) establishing community-based monitoring teams to sustain ODF gains; (ix) conducting national ODF
assessment; (x) conducting independent verification and certification; and (xi) preparing a National Declaration to end
open defecation.
35. Additionally, the project will support capacity-building, behavior change and hygiene promotion activities using a
comprehensive approach that includes assessments to identify and prioritize specific training needs of stakeholders in
WASH, such as health workers, community development assistants, NGOs, civil society organizations (CSOs), community
leaders, and local government officials. Customized training materials will be developed to cover essential topics, including
the importance of sanitation and hygiene, best practices, community engagement strategies, and techniques for
monitoring sustainability.
36. Lastly, this subcomponent will support the development of a Rural Water Supply and Onsite Sanitation Master Plan
for the years 2030-2050. The plan will focus on achieving Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 6.1 and 6.2 and outline
the necessary reforms and investment options to ensure sustainable delivery of water, sanitation and hygiene services.
Component 3: Water Resources Monitoring and Conservation (US$3M)

37. This component supports three key government initiatives: (i) promoting cooperation on transboundary water
management; (ii) improving the monitoring and conservation of water resources; and (iii) establishing a national laboratory
for water quality assessment and monitoring.
Component 4: Support to Sector Reform, Water Utility Capacity Building and Project Management (US$4M)

1. The Government has decided to separate NAWEC's water and electricity businesses and has established a committee
to create a roadmap for this separation. This component aims to facilitate this important reform process while also
providing funding for project management operating costs.
2. Component 4.1 – Institutional Reforms and Performance Based Conditions Monitoring (US$2M). This component
will support the ongoing strategic policy and institutional reforms associated with institutional fragmentation of the sector
and operational efficiency of NAWEC. It includes four performance-based conditions (PBCs) with an estimated value of
USD 2 million, which is 6.6 percent of the total IDA financing:
     • PBC 1: Development of a WSS sector roadmap that includes a coherent program for Sustainable Development
        Goal 6 (SDG 6).



                                                                                                                         Page 9



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)


    •   PBC 2: Development of the sector financial model along with a tariff study for the urban water sector, which should
        include affordability and efficiency analysis, and the adoption and implementation of a new water tariffs matrix
        that will enable cost recovery for the water utility operations.
    •   PBC 3: Signing a performance-based contract with a private operator to help manage NRW is aimed at improving
        the new water company’s operational efficiency and financial sustainability, while also laying the groundwork for
        increased future private sector involvement.
    •   PBC 4: Recruitment of a private sector operator to manage the operations and maintenance of sewerage systems
        and the new fecal sludge treatment plant to be constructed under this project.

3. PBC1 and PBC4 are also intended to help address issues related to institutional fragmentation within the sector. The
separation of water and electricity businesses and the adoption of the new Water Company’s contract program will allow
the Ministry of Fisheries and Water Resources to oversee urban water and wastewater development, in addition to its
current responsibilities in water resources management and rural water supply. On the other hand, transferring urban
wastewater operations to the private sector will enable the new Water Company to concentrate on its core business of
urban water supply services and assets management.

4. Component 4.2 - Project management (US$2.0M). The new operation will not have a standalone, full-fledged project
implementation unit (PIU); instead, it will be implemented by an existing PIU anchored to NAWEC and reporting to the
Ministry of Petroleum and Energy (MoPE). This component will support: (i) project management activities, including
coordination and supervision of implementation; financial management, procurement, and audits; (ii) staffing and training;
day-to-day project activities; (iii) environmental and social (E&S) safeguard management, including supervision of
implementation of an E&S commitment plan and relevant site-specific resettlement action plans as applicable, and
operation of the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM); (iv) monitoring and evaluation (M&E); (v) citizen engagement
activities such as regular beneficiary consultation and feedback mechanisms such as customer surveys, continuous
awareness campaigns on Project activities; and (vi) operating costs of the Steering Committee.

Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC), $0

5. A CERC is included in the project in accordance with the Investment Project Financing (IPF) Policy, paragraphs 12
and 13, for Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance and Capacity Constraints. This will allow for rapid reallocation of
grant uncommitted funds in the event of an eligible emergency as defined in Operational Policy 8.00. A CERC Manual will
guide the activation and implementation of the CERC, and an Emergency Action Plan will be prepared to confirm activities
and financing for a specific event.

6. Gender-sensitive design. The project will strive to actively promote women’s participation in WASH governance and
employment, integrating gender-sensitive approaches such as targeted training, grievance redress mechanisms, and sex-
disaggregated monitoring indicators. These efforts reflect a growing commitment to ensuring that women are not only
beneficiaries but also decision-makers in shaping The Gambia’s development trajectory.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                    Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          Yes



                                                                                                                      Page 10



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)



 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


7. Key environmental concerns associated with project activities during both construction and operational phases
include: waste generation from construction and rehabilitation works will produce solid and liquid wastes, including
hazardous materials (e.g., chemicals from water treatment, sludge from sanitation facilities), air and water pollution
(effluent discharge, contamination of aquifers), and soil pollution are anticipated, particularly from construction runoff,
improper waste disposal, and malfunctioning treatment systems as well as occupational health and safety (including injury
and accidents during construction and installation of furniture and equipment), and community health and safety. Key
social risks are associated with some project activities (fecal sludge plant) and include the potential loss of land and other
assets or access to livelihood and communicable diseases, vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, and individuals. Before
appraisal, the Borrower will engage with key stakeholders and publicly disclose all relevant environmental and social risk
management documents to adequately address the E&S risks and impacts of subprojects.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Sylvestre Bea
   Senior Water Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs

 Implementing Agencies
  National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC)

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
 APPROVAL


 Task Team Leader(s):                        Sylvestre Bea


                                                                                                                         Page 11



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     The Gambia Water and Sanitation Project(P513113)



Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:             Fatouma Toure Ibrahima   23-Oct-2025

Country Director:                     Keiko Miwa               01-Dec-2025




                                                                                    Page 12



                                                                             Official Use Only
