Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Regional Emergency Preparedness and Access to Inclusive Recovery Phase 3(P513341)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01484




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Regional Emergency Preparedness and Access to Inclusive Recovery Phase 3(P513341)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
Congo, Democratic              P513341                      Regional Emergency Preparedness and Access to Inclusive
Republic of                                                 Recovery Phase 3
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN           26-Jan-2026                  26-Feb-2026                   Finance, Competitiveness
AFRICA                                                                                    and Innovation
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Finance          African Risk Capacity
Financing (IPF)                Democratic Republic Congo    Limited

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To strengthen the financial and operational preparedness of participating countries to respond quickly to climate and
other shocks.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                         200.00

  Total Financing                                                                                              200.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                150.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                150.00
      IDA Credit                                                                                              150.00



                                                                                                                   Page 1



                                                                                                           Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Regional Emergency Preparedness and Access to Inclusive Recovery Phase 3(P513341)



   Non-World Bank Group Financing
     Commercial Financing                                                                                          50.00
       Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                           50.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                    Concept Review Decision
Moderate                                                        The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.      The proposed project is Phase 3 of the Regional Emergency Preparedness and Access to Inclusive Recovery
(REPAIR) Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA). REPAIR seeks to strengthen the financial and operational
preparedness of participating countries to respond quickly to climate and other shocks in Eastern and Southern Africa
(ESA). Phase 3 includes the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The REPAIR MPA was approved by the World Bank’s
Executive Directors on 30 July 2024 with Phase 1 (Comoros, Madagascar and Mozambique - P181014, report #
PADHI00380). Phase 2 was approved on July 23rd 2025 (Angola, Burundi, Malawi, Zambia, Seychelles). It is effective in six
countries and has already been used for emergency response in Comoros and Mozambique. There are no changes to the
PrDO, PDO, context or financing amount since the MPA’s approval, and each phase repeats the same activities over
different countries.

2.       ESA economies are highly vulnerable to shocks. While economic activity is set to rebound from 2.5 percent in
2024 to 3.0 percent in 2025, and to accelerate further to 4.2 percent in 2026–27, growth is still not strong enough to
significantly reduce poverty and meet people’s aspirations. Real income per capita in 2025 is expected to be approximately
2 percent below its most recent peak in 2015. The region faces heightened uncertainty due to changes in trade dynamics,
regional conflict, and climate change affecting people and crops. ESA includes 12 out of the 26 Low-Income Countries
whose prospects for graduation are much more challenging than at the turn of the century.

3.       The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) is a low-income country with immense natural potential (minerals,
forests, agricultural land), but faces major structural challenges. In 2024, its GDP grew by 6.5%, supported by the mining
sector, although growth is expected to slow to 5.1% in 2025 with the temporary ban on cobalt exports. Inflation declined
to 11.3 percent and foreign exchange reserves cover 2.5 months of imports. Despite these performances, the DRC remains
one of the poorest countries in the world: 73.5 percent of the population lives below the extreme poverty line. Persistent

                                                                                                                       Page 2



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Regional Emergency Preparedness and Access to Inclusive Recovery Phase 3(P513341)


conflicts in the east, including the resurgence of the M23 armed group, have displaced more than 6.7 million people and
deprived the state of control of about 20 percent of the national territory. The economy remains undiversified: the mining
sector accounts for 17.4 percent of GDP, agriculture remains vulnerable and the informal sector dominates. The private
sector remains embryonic, hampered by inadequate infrastructure and a restrictive business environment

4.      The high vulnerability of DRC to climate shocks operates as a fragility multiplier, impacting poverty, food
security, economic opportunities and political stability. The government has major budgetary constraints in financing the
response to shocks as well as security constraints – mainly due to the conflicts in the east of the country – for its
implementation. The DRC is mainly exposed to floods, human epidemics and animal diseases and volcanic eruptions. Other
important risks are landslides, droughts and bushfires. The available data show that 189 disasters occurred between 2000
and 2025, affecting approximately 8.2 million people1.


 Sectoral and Institutional Context

5.      Despite progress achieved by the DRC on disaster risk finance, the Government does not have the fiscal buffers,
financial tools and operational delivery channels to respond adequately to emergencies. The DRC has three disaster risk
financing (DRF) instruments, of which the National Solidarity and Humanitarian Disaster Management Fund (CSN-GHC) is
the main instrument. DRC also has a budget reserve for "Intervention(s) for natural disasters, calamities and major
accidents" mobilized for various types of unforeseen events, including conflicts, and resources from the National Road
Maintenance Fund (FONER). These mechanisms depend mainly on the government’s budget and do not always have
timely access to emergency funding. Although transparency and monitoring of budget execution have been improved in
recent years, available information on the use of these instruments remains incomplete and shows that the funds
deployed for responding to natural disasters (~ US$3.5 million) are highly constrained by the country's other needs,
particularly in the security area. Hence, humanitarians and the private sector bear a large share of the cost of emergency
response, recovery and reconstruction.

Pre-arranged financing solutions can enable the Government of DRC to achieve substantial savings, particularly against
moderate and extreme shocks, which are expected to increase in frequency in the coming decades. A forthcoming
disaster risk finance diagnostic for DRC shows that the lack of dedicated resources may force the government to reallocate
or borrow ex-post (Covid-19) to the detriment of other equally critical investments and expenditures. The prearranged
financing solutions simulated for this diagnosis and their use for shocks of different magnitudes show that, for moderate
to severe shocks, these solutions could result in substantial cost savings ranging from 8 percent to 55 percent in
comparison with a strategy that includes only government budgetary instruments.


 Relationship to CPF

6.     The REPAIR program is consistent with the cross-cutting area on climate and environment of the FY22-26
Country Partnership Framework of DRC. The Country Climate and Development Report (2023) recommends that DRC



1 World Bank 2025, Disaster Risk Finance Diagnostic: Democratic Republic of Congo, publication forthcoming.



                                                                                                                      Page 3



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Regional Emergency Preparedness and Access to Inclusive Recovery Phase 3(P513341)


should rely on regional approaches to address disaster risk finance, develop a risk finance diagnostic and risk finance
strategy and obtain pre-arranged instruments to respond quickly to disasters.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To strengthen the financial and operational preparedness of participating countries to respond quickly to climate and
 other shocks.


  Key Results (From PCN)

 REPAIR seeks to address the over-reliance on ex-post financial instruments and budget reallocations after disasters, and
 to facilitate the flow of funds from pre-arranged financial instruments to country delivery channels.

 D. Concept Description

7.      Each participating country has access to: a suite of pre-arranged disaster risk instruments through a Regional
Climate Risk Fund under Component 1 and a capacity-building program on disaster risk finance under Component 2.
The REPAIR program is managed by one implementing entity for all particiapting countries, which was competitively
seclected by first-mover countries, African Risk Capacity Limited (ARC Ltd).

Component 1: Regional Climate Risk Fund (RCRF)

8.      Component 1: The operation will capitalize the RCRF already created by Phase 1 to provide Phase 3 participating
countries with access to pre-arranged and cost-efficient financing in anticipation of climate and other shocks. The Fund
is operational, is managed by ARC Ltd and pools the contributions of REPAIR countries. The RCRF offers: (i) reserves for
moderate and frequent shocks; (ii) contingent financing for severe and less frequent shocks; and (iii) parametric insurance
for catastrophic climate events or natural disasters, placed in international markets. The eight participating countries have
already approved the reserves management policy and ARC Ltd has mobilized expertise in reserve management. While
reserves are invested as a pool, countries retain access to their own funding regardless of shocks in other countries.

9.       The RCRF is based on three principles. Speed so that MoFs get funds within seven days after a shock meeting a
pre-defined threshold; flexibility as countries choose how to invest their IDA/IBRD envelope into the three instruments
based on their risk profile and needs, and how to use the funds upon a shock; and sustainability as the RCRF is designed
as a platform to mobilize adaptation finance from public and private sources. The lending instrument is an IPF, with a DDO
component for the contingent financing for most countries. Figure 2 illustrates the structure of REPAIR.

Component 2: Technical Assistance and Operationalization of the RCRF

10.    Under Component 2, REPAIR strengthens the operational readiness of participating countries by: i) supporting
the operationalization costs of the RCRF, ii) building capacities of the MoFs on disaster risk finance products and tools
promoting peer-to-peer learning across participating countries, iii) enabling the MoFs to timely channel the funds after an
emergency through pre-identified delivery channels iv), supporting the MoFs in establishing and maintaining a robust
governance framework to ensure the traceability of the funds.



                                                                                                                         Page 4



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Regional Emergency Preparedness and Access to Inclusive Recovery Phase 3(P513341)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                    Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


The environmental risk associated with REPAIR Phase 3 in the DRC is classified as Moderate. The project is primarily
focused on financial and technical assistance rather than large-scale civil works or infrastructure investments. Its main
objective is to strengthen disaster risk financing mechanisms and ensure the efficient transfer of pre-arranged funds to
delivery institutions for rapid response following shocks. Potential environmental risks may arise indirectly from small-
scale infrastructure repairs or community works undertaken by delivery channels such as FPM, PNDA, NGOs, or public
works entities. These activities could generate localized impacts including dust, noise, waste, and minor OHS concerns.
Such risks are expected to be site-specific, temporary, and reversible, and can be effectively mitigated through standard
good practices and appropriate protocols. The involvement of multiple delivery channels introduces variability in
environmental management capacity. While some entities have prior World Bank project experience, others have limited
familiarity with ESF requirements. This unevenness could hinder consistent application of screening and monitoring
measures. Consequently, institutional capacity gaps represent a moderate risk, highlighting the need for targeted training,
capacity support, and strengthened oversight to ensure compliance. The project does not involve activities in sensitive
ecosystems, protected areas, or high-biodiversity regions, reducing the likelihood of significant adverse impacts. However,
implementation in a fragile and conflict-affected setting increases operational complexity and emphasizes the need for
robust monitoring, supervision, and clear contractual obligations across all
entities.
Overall, the Moderate rating reflects the limited scale of potential impacts, uneven institutional capacity, and
the importance of effective screening, capacity-building, and Bank oversight to keep risks manageable.

The social risk is classified as Moderate. The project is financial in nature and will not finance large-scale resettlement
or major civil works. Its activities are centered on strengthening disaster risk financing mechanisms and channeling pre-
arranged funds to delivery institutions for rapid response to shocks. Social risks may arise from the equity, transparency,
and accountability of fund distribution through delivery channels such as FPM, PNDA, NGOs, or public entities. Key
concerns include the potential exclusion of vulnerable groups (women, Indigenous Peoples, people with disabilities,
smallholder farmers, and displaced persons), weaknesses in targeting and delivery mechanisms, and risks of misuse or
diversion of funds. Where funds support small-scale infrastructure repairs or cash-for-work programs, there may be risks
related to labor management, OHS, community health and safety, and localized grievances, delivery channels have varying
levels of capacity to manage such risks. This variability underscores the need for strengthened institutional arrangements,
clear contractual obligations, and capacity support of ESF requirements.


                                                                                                                       Page 5



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Regional Emergency Preparedness and Access to Inclusive Recovery Phase 3(P513341)


Overall, the Moderate rating reflects: (i) the project’s reliance on multiple delivery channels with uneven capacity, (ii)
risks of exclusion in a fragile context, and (iii) the need for robust stakeholder engagement, grievance systems, and Bank
oversight. Resources will be channeled through ministries, implementing agencies, and partners already engaged in Bank-
supported operations, helping to reduce social risk exposure by leveraging existing systems, and institutional experience.
The Bank and ARC Ltd will continue to provide targeted technical assistance to strengthen the operational capacity of
involved institutions, while also regularly monitoring government systems to assess their ability to manage social risks and
impacts effectively. With these measures in place, social risks are expected to remain within manageable levels.
  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
  CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Caroline Cerruti
   Lead Financial Sector Specialist

   Zouhour Karray
   Senior Private Sector Specialist

   Etienne Sannicolo
   Senior Financial Sector Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Finance Democratic Republic Congo

 Implementing Agencies
  African Risk Capacity Limited

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
 APPROVAL


 Task Team Leader(s):                       Caroline Cerruti, Zouhour Karray, Etienne Sannicolo

 Approved By




                                                                                                                        Page 6



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Regional Emergency Preparedness and Access to Inclusive Recovery Phase 3(P513341)



Practice Manager/Manager:

Country Director:                      Kofi Nouve                            26-Nov-2025




                                                                                                   Page 7



                                                                                           Official Use Only
