Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 03/16/2026 | Report No: ESRSA04855




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 17, 2026                                                                                          Page 1 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P513349                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)     CORB-FIT                    2026

                     Operation Name            Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB): Financing Innovation in Transboundary Waters

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Eastern and Southern      Angola, Botswana, Namibia              EASTERN AND                 Water
                     Africa                                                           SOUTHERN AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Permanent Okavango Permanent Okavango River Basin                08-Apr-2026                 07-May-2026
                     River Basin Water  Water Commission (OKACOM)
                     Commission
                     (OKACOM)




Public Disclosure
                     Total Project Cost


                     10,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective is to support the capitalization of the Cubango-Okavango River Basin (CORB) Fund
                     towards sustainable development in the Basin.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Cubango-Okavango river basin (CORB) is a hydrologically complex, and deeply interconnected system which
                     highlights the importance of transboundary solutions. Community livelihoods, ranging from artisanal fisheries to small-
                     scale agriculture in all three riparian states (Angola, Namibia and Botswana) depend on the CORB’s floodplains, rivers,
                     wetlands and other natural resources. These resources are also vital for larger industry, including tourism. Water
                     resources in the CORB are facing competing demands that jeopardize the sustainability of livelihoods and ecosystems. In

                    Mar 17, 2026                                                                                                  Page 2 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                     addition to the threats posed by poverty, rapid rural population growth, and climate change, the CORB’s water
                     resources face demands from urbanization trends; resource-based livelihoods; expanding tourism; commercial
                     agriculture; and water extraction. Addressing these challenges require innovations in transboundary water financing to
                     achieve economies of scale and scope for transboundary basin financing needs that cannot otherwise be accomplished
                     at a national level. The project will support the capitalization of the CORB Fund towards sustainable development in the
                     Cubango-Okavango river basin. The operationalization of the CORB Fund will be instrumental to enable a regional
                     funding mechanism for cross-border financing needs with strong governance and decision-making capabilities, and with
                     capacity to raise and channel financing from a diverse set of stakeholders. Project support includes the preparation of
                     viable project concepts on the CORB Fund pillars, as well as strengthening the coordination, management, and
                     communication between all the stakeholders involved in the basin, thus enhancing strategies to raise additional
                     funding. Component 1 focuses on the CORB Fund’s capitalization. This component will support the consolidation and
                     expansion of the CORB Fund as an innovative financial mechanism, and advance collaboration towards its long-term
                     sustainability. It includes (1.1.) the establishment and implementation of the CORB Fund’s governance, operational
                     tools, and systems, (1.2.) the implementation of stakeholder coordination and engagement for long-term sustainability
                     of the CORB Fund, (1.3.) support to the CORB Fund's communication and knowledge management, and (1.4.) CORB
                     endowment fund capitalization. Component 2 focuses on developing the CORB Fund’s pipeline for potential investment.
                     This component will focus on the development of the CORB Fund’s pipeline of investment to address the priority areas
                     identified by Angola, Botswana and Namibia in the CORB, laying the foundation for larger/more complex investments in
                     the future. The component’s activities will focus on two complementary areas of support: (2.1) preparing the CORB
                     Fund Financing Roadmap as well as project concepts at pre-feasibility and feasibility level for potential investment; and
                     (2.2) enhancing capacity on economics of biodiversity to inform investment. The development of the pipeline for




Public Disclosure
                     potential future investment will be conducted with close engagement with the Ministers of Finance of Riparian
                     countries to ensure high level buy-in and engagement participation in the preparation of the Fund’s long-term
                     capitalization and development into the role as a regional financial institution. Component 3 focuses on project
                     management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E).


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project, which is a technical assistance, will focus on designing and prioritizing activities (not funded by this project)
                     to be implemented within the Cubango-Okavango River Basin. The topographic extent of the Cubango-Okavango Basin
                     comprises approximately 700,000 squarre km. Flowing from the Angolan highlands, the Cuito and Cubango Rivers meet
                     to form the Cubango-Okavango along the border of Namibia and Angola before flowing through the panhandle and
                     spilling into the Okavango Delta in Botswana. The Cubango-Okavango river basin is internationally important for its
                     biodiversity and biological productivity and the largest Ramsar site in the world. Seasonal flooding from the Cubango
                     River creates distinct wet and dry seasons, influencing the movement and distribution of more than 700 species of
                     mammals, birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles. It has a variety of habitats that is globally unique such as the Okavango
                     delta and wildlife rich wetlands which is home to a significant number of rare and endangered species, although the
                     delta has only a few endemic species. The wetland environment of the delta provides a staging post for birds migrating
                     to southern Africa. Floodplains sustain the river in the dry season and store floodwaters that would otherwise increase
                     flooding downstream. From the headwaters of the Cubango River, where there are numerous incised valleys, come high
                     peak flows at the beginning of the rainy season that are critical to maintaining floodplains and fisheries along the
                     Angola–Namibia border, and later in the year, further downstream, in the Delta. These seasonally inundated floodplains
                     are critical for providing bridging forage for wildlife and livestock. The annual flow regime of the Cubango when

                    Mar 17, 2026                                                                                                        Page 3 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                     combined with the Cuito’s sustained flows, largely sustains riverine ecosystems and communities of people living along
                     the lower Cubango-Okavango River, the Okavango Delta, and the outflowing Thamalakane and Boteti Rivers.
                     Community livelihoods, ranging from artisanal fisheries to small-scale agriculture in the riparian states depend on the
                     CORB’s floodplains, rivers, wetlands and other natural resources. These resources are also vital for tourism, key for local
                     livelihoods. In Namibia and Botswana, a part of the basin’s population is directly dependent on surface water resources,
                     while other parts rely on groundwater resources. In each country, the basin populations are remote relative to the
                     countries’ capital cities and main centers of economic activity and this is reflected in social development indicators in
                     the basin that are lower than the national figures. In general, the people of the basin are poorer, less healthy and less
                     educated than other groups in their respective countries.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented by the Cubango-Okavango river basin (CORB) fund Secretariate established within
                     Okavango River Basin Water Commission (OKACOM) Secretariate. The Secretariat’s tasks will include general project
                     management, procurement, financial management, environment and social standards compliance, monitoring and
                     evaluation, and reporting. The Secretariat will be headed by an Executive Director and a Procurement Officer, a
                     Financial Management Officer, an Environmental and Social Officer, and a Monitoring and Evaluation Officer. The UNDP
                     through GEF funding is supporting the OKACOM Strategic Action Plan, which includes supporting OKACOM to undertake
                     various environmental studies including among other a strategic environmental assessment (SEA) focusing on existing
                     plans, programs and potential downstream development options in the river basin. The SEA includes the development
                     of transboundary environmental guidelines, a monitoring framework and forecasting water needs for water needs for
                     the watershed which is currently under preparation. OKACOM has some experience with World Bank projects, linked to




Public Disclosure
                     the Regional Climate Resilience Program (RCRP) (180171) however no experience with acting as an implementation
                     entity. The overall E&S performance rating for the RCRP project is currently Moderately Satisfactory. The institutional
                     environmental and social risk management capacity is currently limited. An environmental and social specialist will be
                     appointed as part of the implementation entity to be hosted in OKACOM within the timeframe stipulated in the
                     Environmental and Social Commitments Plan. The E&S specialist will be responsible for ensuring the integration of E&S
                     aspects within the CORB fund decision and day-to-day environmental and social risk management during the operations
                     of the CORB fund.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating for the project is Substantial. The project will finance technical assistance to support the
                     establishment of a financing mechanism, institutional strengthening of OKACOM, and the design of a livelihoods and
                     biodiversity enhancement program to inform future investments. The project will not finance any physical works or
                     direct investments, and the technical assistance activities supported under Component 2 (Type 1 and Type 3 TA) are
                     expected to have limited to no direct environmental impacts. Notwithstanding the absence of physical investments,
                     the Substantial risk rating reflects the potential environmental risks associated with future downstream investments
                     that may be supported through the operationalization of the CORB Fund. These downstream activities are not yet
                     defined and will only be identified during implementation, following the completion of feasibility and preparatory


                    Mar 17, 2026                                                                                                       Page 4 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                     studies. Potential downstream interventions are expected to take place within the Cubango Okavango River Basin, a
                     globally significant and environmentally sensitive transboundary ecosystem, and could give rise to significant adverse
                     environmental impacts if not adequately assessed and managed. Indicative downstream activities may include: (a)
                     livelihoods focused interventions such as potable water and sanitation, renewable energy access, conservation
                     agriculture, sustainable fisheries, efficient cookstoves, and community infrastructure; (b) ecosystem protection
                     measures including forest management, fire control, anti poaching, ecological restoration, sustainable logging and
                     charcoal alternatives, and sediment and runoff reduction; and (c) nature based solutions, including climate resilience
                     investments, eco tourism development, and basin wide conservation interventions. Such activities could potentially
                     result in impacts on biodiversity and critical habitats, hydrology and environmental flows, water quality, introduction
                     of invasive species, and cumulative or transboundary environmental effects, which are considered medium in
                     magnitude, predictable and could lead to cumulative and transboundary impacts. To manage these risks, the CORB
                     Fund’s operational policies and procedures will incorporate robust environmental and social screening, assessment,
                     and monitoring arrangements consistent with the Environmental and Social Standards (ESS). The preparation and
                     adoption of the relevant environmental and social frameworks, including screening procedures and requirements for
                     project level assessments, are set out in the Environmental and Social Commitments Plan (ESCP). These instruments
                     will ensure that all priority investments are appropriately screened, that proportionate environmental and social
                     assessments are prepared as required, and that mitigation measures are implemented prior to any future financing
                     decisions. The Terms of Reference for all technical assistance activities financed under the project will integrate the
                     relevant ESS requirements, to the satisfaction of the Bank as set out in the ESCP. While OKACOM has prior experience
                     with World Bank financed projects, institutional capacity for environmental and social risk management remains
                     limited. Accordingly, targeted capacity building measures to strengthen environmental and social management




Public Disclosure
                     systems and oversight have been included in the project design and reflected in the ESCP.
                                                                                                                                   Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating at Concept Stage was assessed as Substantial, reflecting a precautionary approach given the
                     Project’s transboundary context, the ecological and socio economic and overall contextual sensitivity of the Cubango
                     Okavango River Basin, and the potential for future downstream investments supported through the
                     operationalization of the CORB Fund to affect livelihoods, access to natural resources, and vulnerable groups. At
                     Appraisal Stage, the social risk rating has been reassessed as Moderate, based on greater clarity regarding the
                     Project’s scope, design, and instruments. The Project finances technical assistance only and does not support physical
                     works, land acquisition, restrictions on land use, or direct engagement with project affected communities. As such, no
                     direct or immediate social impacts are anticipated under the Project. While the CORB Fund may, in the future,
                     support investments with potential social implications, such downstream activities are not defined, financed, or
                     committed under this Project, and any associated risks remain indirect and contingent at this stage. Moreover, the
                     Project incorporates a robust framework to manage potential future social risks, including the application of ESS
                     consistent Terms of Reference for technical assistance activities, the use of the Transboundary Environmental
                     Assessment Guidelines for screening and assessment, and provisions to future project level social assessments and
                     stakeholder engagement under ESS10 should downstream investments be identified. Capacity strengthening
                     measures are also included to enhance social risk management within OKACOM. In this context, a Moderate social
                     risk rating more accurately reflects the Project’s upstream, non binding nature and the presence of adequate systems
                     to manage social risks proportionately, while allowing for the rating to be revisited if downstream activities become
                     more defined during implementation.



                    Mar 17, 2026                                                                                                    Page 5 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      The Project will not finance physical investments. However, the downstream activities that may be supported in the
                      future through the operationalization of the CORB Fund could give rise to environmental and social risks and impacts
                      relevant to ESS1–ESS8 and ESS10. While the nature, scale, and location of these downstream activities are not yet
                      defined and will only be determined during implementation, they may result in direct, indirect, cumulative, and
                      transboundary impacts if not adequately assessed and managed. Potential environmental and social risks associated
                      with downstream activities may include, inter alia: risks of water pollution and changes to environmental flows
                      (ESS3); community exposure to health and safety risks (ESS4); habitat modification, including impacts on natural and
                      critical habitats and biodiversity (ESS6); impacts on the sustainable management of living natural resources (ESS6);
                      introduction and spread of invasive alien species; impacts on livelihoods and access to ecosystem services; and risks
                      of exclusion of vulnerable or disadvantaged groups (ESS10), among others. To address these risks at a strategic level,
                      OKACOM prepared a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) for the Cubango Okavango River Basin in 2022,
                      together with a Transboundary Environmental Assessment Guideline (TEAG) prior to the engagement of the Bank.
                      The SEA assessed Member States’ key policies, plans, and programs affecting the Basin, identifying potential socio
                      economic and environmental benefits and risks. It highlighted ecosystem integrity, biodiversity conservation, and
                      water availability as key areas of concern, particularly where development is not adequately coordinated among
                      Member States. The SEA’s Environmental Action Plan (EAP) recommends strengthened transboundary coordination,
                      enhanced environmental and social capacity within the CORB, and the establishment of a strategic framework for



Public Disclosure
                      environmental decision making and monitoring of proposed developments in the Basin. The SEA further requires that
                      project level environmental and social assessments be undertaken for downstream investments, including
                      consideration of cumulative and transboundary impacts. To operationalize these recommendations, OKACOM
                      developed the TEAG, which was disclosed in English and Portuguese on February 23, 2026. The TEAG was prepared
                      prior to the engagement of the Bank and with reference to the environmental and social requirements of multilateral
                      development banks, including the IFC, the European Investment Bank, and the African Development Bank. It sets out
                      the screening, categorization, and assessment procedures to be applied to proposed investments in the Basin. The
                      TEAG will be reviewed after project approval and updated as needed to address any gaps which may exist. The
                      requirements of the TEAG will be incorporated into the CORB Fund’s environmental and social risk management
                      system, including, but not limited to, environmental and social screening, assessment, and monitoring tools to be
                      developed under Sub component 1.1, as part of the Fund’s operational, management, and decision making
                      arrangements. Component 2 will support the preparation of pre feasibility and feasibility studies and capacity
                      building activities (Type 1 and Type 3 Technical Assistance). For these activities, the CORB Fund will prepare Terms of
                      Reference (ToRs) that reflect the relevant ESS requirements, as set out in the Environmental and Social Commitment
                      Plan (ESCP). The ToRs will only be prepared after project approval. All ToRs will be submitted to the World Bank for
                      review and no objection prior to procurement. Where relevant, feasibility studies supported under the Project will
                      include provisions for preliminary environmental and social assessments, proportionate to the nature and scale of the
                      proposed downstream activities.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant




                    Mar 17, 2026                                                                                                    Page 6 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                      ESS10 is relevant to the Project given its regional, transboundary scope and the role of the Project in supporting the
                      operationalization of the CORB Fund. While the Project finances technical assistance only and does not involve
                      physical works or direct engagement with project affected communities, its activities will support institutional
                      arrangements, analytical work, and capacity building that may inform future investment decisions within the Cubango
                      Okavango River Basin. Effective stakeholder engagement is therefore important to ensure transparency,
                      inclusiveness, and accountability in the Fund’s governance and decision making processes. Stakeholders at this stage
                      primarily include OKACOM, the CORB Fund Secretariat, relevant national and sub national government entities in the
                      riparian countries, technical partners, and development partners. Potential project affected communities and
                      vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may become relevant stakeholders at later stages if and when downstream
                      investments are identified. However, at this stage, such activities are not defined, financed, or committed under this
                      Project. As such, social risks related to stakeholder exclusion or inequitable distribution of benefits remain indirect
                      and contingent at appraisal stage, consistent with the Project’s Moderate social risk rating. A draft Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared in accordance with ESS10. Stakeholder consultations are scheduled to take
                      place on March 18, and feedback from these consultations will be reflected in the finalized SEP. The SEP will be
                      disclosed prior to Appraisal, both in country and on the Bank’s website, in line with ESF requirements. The SEP
                      outlines stakeholder identification and engagement approaches appropriate to the Project’s technical assistance
                      scope, including information disclosure, consultation with institutional stakeholders, and mechanisms to ensure
                      transparency and coordination across riparian states. The Project will also establish and maintain a grievance
                      mechanism proportionate to its scope, accessible to project stakeholders, and capable of receiving and addressing
                      concerns in a timely and transparent manner. Provisions to address SEA/SH related complaints in a safe, confidential,
                      and survivor centered manner will be included, consistent with ESS10. Should downstream activities be identified in




Public Disclosure
                      the future through the CORB Fund and during the lifetime of this Project, stakeholder engagement requirements will
                      be reassessed and expanded as appropriate, and project level instruments will be prepared in line with ESS10.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant to the Project as it will engage direct workers employed by OKACOM and the CORB Fund Secretariat,
                      as well as contracted workers, including consultants and technical experts engaged to deliver technical assistance,
                      analytical work, capacity building, and feasibility studies. The Project does not finance civil works or labor intensive
                      activities and is therefore not expected to involve a large workforce, labor influx, or occupational risks beyond those
                      typically associated with office based and analytical assignments. Potential labor related risks are expected to be
                      limited and manageable, and may include standard occupational health and safety considerations for office
                      environments, fair terms and conditions of employment, and the management of consultant conduct. No risks related
                      to child labor or forced labor are anticipated. To manage labor related risks in a proportionate manner, the Project
                      will develop and implement Labor Management Procedures (LMP) consistent with ESS2. The LMP will be
                      incorporated as part of the ESCp and will set out the applicable terms and conditions of employment, occupational
                      health and safety measures, codes of conduct (including provisions related to SEA/SH), and a worker grievance
                      mechanism accessible to all project workers. Requirements of ESS2 will also be reflected in relevant procurement and
                      contractual documents for consultants and contractors. Given the Project’s technical assistance focus and the nature
                      of the workforce involved, ESS2 risks are considered low to moderate and will be managed through the measures set
                      out in the ESCP.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant



                    Mar 17, 2026                                                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                      While the activities directly supported under the Project will not have physical environmental impacts, potential
                      downstream activities that may be supported once the CORB Fund is operationalized could give rise to environmental
                      risks and impacts relevant to ESS3, particularly if not adequately assessed and managed. These risks relate primarily
                      to water quality, water availability, and transboundary water impacts within the Cubango Okavango River Basin.
                      However, the full extent of potential impacts and risks will only be known during ptoject implementation and once
                      the potential pipleline projects have been identified. The Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) prepared prior to
                      the involvement of the Bank in 2022 identified that uncoordinated development across Member States could result in
                      over allocation of water resources, with significant adverse consequences for downstream users and ecosystems. In
                      particular, reduced environmental flows and deteriorating water quality could adversely affect the Okavango Delta in
                      Botswana, a UNESCO World Heritage Site and Ramsar Wetland of International Importance, which is highly
                      dependent on the quantity and quality of inflows originating from upstream catchments, notably in Angola. Poor
                      coordination and management of upstream land and water use could therefore result in cumulative and
                      transboundary impacts, including altered hydrological regimes and degradation of downstream ecosystems. The SEA
                      further highlighted that high density development scenarios could exacerbate water scarcity, while poorly managed
                      agricultural activities, especially those involving intensive use of fertilizers and pesticides, could lead to diffuse
                      pollution, nutrient loading, and contamination of surface and groundwater resources, with downstream implications
                      for ecosystem health and human use. Such risks are particularly relevant in the context of the Basin’s hydrological
                      functioning, where floodplains regulate seasonal flows, sustain river systems during the dry season, and support
                      fisheries, wildlife, and livelihoods across Angola, Namibia, and Botswana. Disruption of these processes could
                      undermine the Basin’s capacity to maintain environmental flows, water quality, and ecosystem services. To mitigate
                      these risks, environmental and social screening and monitoring tools will be applied as part of the CORB Fund’s




Public Disclosure
                      decision making processes. The preparation of these tools will be supported under Sub component 1.1, drawing on
                      the SEA and the TEAG. The TEAG establishes screening and assessment requirements for proposed investments, with
                      specific provisions to address water related risks, cumulative impacts, and transboundary considerations in line with
                      ESS3. Under Components 2, Terms of Reference for technical assistance activities, including pre feasibility and
                      feasibility studies, will incorporate provisions for the identification, assessment, and mitigation of risks related to
                      water resource efficiency, pollution prevention, and environmental flow management, consistent with ESS3 and the
                      ESCP. Where relevant, feasibility studies will include preliminary environmental and social assessments to identify
                      potential water related impacts at an early stage and inform the design of appropriate mitigation measures prior to
                      any future investment decisions.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant to the Project due to its regional scope and the potential for future downstream investments
                      supported through the operationalization of the CORB Fund to interact with communities and shared natural
                      resources within the Cubango Okavango River Basin. However, the Project itself finances technical assistance only
                      and does not involve physical works, construction activities, service delivery, or direct engagement with project
                      affected communities. As such, no direct community health and safety risks are anticipated under the Project’s
                      activities. There are potential community health and safety risks associated with future downstream investments—
                      such as those related to health, water quality, ecosystem services, or community exposure to project activities.
                      However, at this stage under the scope of this Project such risks are indirect and contingent, as downstream activities
                      are not defined, financed, or committed under this Project. Any such risks would depend on the nature, scale,
                      location, and design of future investments and will be assessed and managed at the appropriate stage. To manage


                    Mar 17, 2026                                                                                                    Page 8 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                      potential future ESS4 related risks in a proportionate manner, the Project will support the application of
                      environmental and social screening and assessment procedures through the Transboundary Environmental
                      Assessment Guidelines and ESS consistent Terms of Reference for technical assistance activities, as reflected in the
                      ESCP. Where feasibility studies are prepared, they will include preliminary environmental and social considerations,
                      proportionate to the potential risks, to inform future decision making. Should downstream investments be identified
                      in the future and within the lifetime of this Project, project level instruments will be prepared as necessary to address
                      community health and safety risks in accordance with ESS4. In this context, ESS4 relevance reflects the Project’s role
                      in establishing systems and processes for managing potential future risks, rather than direct impacts on communities,
                      but will be adapted as needed during implementation.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      ESS5 is considered relevant on a precautionary basis given the Project’s role in supporting the operationalization of
                      the CORB Fund and the possibility that future downstream investments, if identified and financed outside the scope
                      of this Project, could involve land based activities. However, the Project itself finances technical assistance only and
                      does not support physical works, land acquisition, restrictions on land use, or any activities that would result in
                      physical or economic displacement. At this stage, no downstream investments are defined, financed, or committed
                      under the Project, and therefore no direct ESS5 related impacts are anticipated. Any potential risks related to land
                      acquisition or restrictions on land use remain indirect and contingent, dependent on the nature, scale, location, and
                      design of future investments that may be considered by the CORB Fund outside of the direct scope of this project. To
                      manage such potential risks in a proportionate manner, the Project will support the application of environmental and
                      social screening and assessment procedures through the Transboundary Environmental Assessment Guidelines and



Public Disclosure
                      ESS consistent Terms of Reference for technical assistance activities, as reflected in the ESCP. Should future
                      downstream investments be identified that may involve land acquisition or restrictions on land use, ESS5
                      requirements will be assessed and addressed at the appropriate stage through project level instruments.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant as potential downstream activities supported during the operationalization of the CORB Fund may be
                      implemented within an internationally important biodiversity area, including the Okavango Delta, a UNESCO World
                      Heritage Site and the largest Ramsar site globally. The Cubango Okavango River Basin, covering approximately
                      700,000 km², is internationally recognized for its exceptional biodiversity and biological productivity. Originating in
                      the Angolan highlands, the Cuito and Cubango Rivers converge along the Angola–Namibia border before flowing
                      through the Okavango Panhandle and into the Okavango Delta in Botswana. Seasonal flooding creates distinct wet
                      and dry cycles that shape ecosystem functioning and support the movement and distribution of more than 700
                      species of mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, and reptiles. The Basin contains globally unique habitats, including
                      extensive wetlands and floodplains that provide critical breeding, feeding, and staging areas for wildlife, including
                      rare and endangered species. While the Project itself will not finance physical investments, future downstream
                      activities, if not appropriately assessed and managed, could result in significant adverse impacts on biodiversity,
                      habitats, and ecosystem services. Although the specific downstream activities are not yet defined, they may include
                      interventions with particular relevance to ESS6, such as sustainable fisheries, forest management, and sustainable
                      logging and charcoal alternatives, among others. Potential risks and impacts may include loss or degradation of
                      natural and critical habitats, impacts on species and ecological processes, introduction and spread of invasive alien


                    Mar 17, 2026                                                                                                      Page 9 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                      species, and reduced availability of living natural resources for local communities. These risks will be assessed once
                      sufficient information on the nature, scale, and location of downstream activities becomes available. To manage
                      potential biodiversity risks, environmental and social screening and monitoring tools will be developed and applied as
                      part of the CORB Fund’s financing and decision making processes. The preparation of these tools will be supported
                      under Sub component 1.1, drawing on existing strategic instruments and good international practice. Components 2
                      will support technical assistance activities, including pre feasibility and feasibility studies and capacity building. For
                      these activities, ToRs will incorporate provisions for the screening, assessment, and mitigation of risks related to ESS6,
                      consistent with the ESCP. Where relevant, feasibility studies will include preliminary biodiversity and habitat
                      assessments, proportionate to the nature and scale of the proposed downstream activities. In addition, activities
                      supported under sub-component 2.2 aim to strengthen livelihoods and promote biodiversity conservation, including
                      by addressing existing pressures on ecosystems and enhancing sustainable natural resource management practices
                      within the Basin.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                               Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is considered relevant on a precautionary basis, given the Project’s regional scope and the fact that the Cubango
                      Okavango River Basin includes communities that may have characteristics consistent with Indigenous Peoples or Sub
                      Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities as defined under ESS7. However, the Project
                      finances technical assistance only and does not support physical works, land acquisition, or activities that would
                      directly affect such communities. No downstream investments are defined, financed, or committed under the
                      Project, and therefore no direct or indirect impacts on Indigenous Peoples / SSAHUTLCs are anticipated. Any potential



Public Disclosure
                      risks related to ESS7 would depend on the nature, scale, location, and design of future investments that may be
                      considered by the CORB Fund. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared in accordance with ESS10
                      and is tailored to the Project’s technical assistance scope. At this stage, stakeholder engagement focuses on
                      institutional and organizational stakeholders, including OKACOM, the CORB Fund Secretariat, relevant government
                      entities in the riparian states, and technical and development partners involved in the governance and
                      operationalization of the CORB Fund. Given the upstream, non investment nature of the Project, no specific project
                      affected (or project beneficiary) communities have been identified. The SEP is a living document and will be updated,
                      as appropriate, should the nature of Project activities change or if future downstream investments are identified that
                      may interact with Indigenous Peoples / SSAHUTLCs. In such cases, the applicability of ESS7 will be assessed at the
                      appropriate stage, and ESS7 specific requirements, including culturally appropriate engagement and consent
                      processes where relevant, will be addressed through project level instruments in accordance with ESS7. In this
                      context, the relevance of ESS7 at appraisal stage reflects a precautionary, systems based approach, rather than the
                      presence of current or foreseeable impacts under the Project.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      ESS8 is considered relevant at this stage, given the environmental and cultural significance of the Cubango Okavango
                      River Basin. In particular, the Okavango Delta is inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List as a natural site,
                      recognized for its exceptional natural beauty, outstanding ecological processes, and outstanding biodiversity values.
                      The Project finances technical assistance only and does not support physical works or activities that would directly
                      affect cultural heritage. However, future downstream investments that may be identified through the CORB could
                      potentially interact with areas of cultural heritage value within the Basin. As such, the relevance and potential


                    Mar 17, 2026                                                                                                      Page 10 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                      implications for cultural heritage will need to be further assessed as pre feasibility and feasibility studies are prepared
                      under Component 2, in a manner proportionate to the nature, scale, and location of any future investments. Cultural
                      heritage considerations will be addressed, as appropriate, through ESS consistent Terms of Reference, in line ith ESCP.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not currently considered relevant.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                No
                       Due to the nature of the project, the use of the borrower framework is not being considered.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                   No
                       It is likely that other multilateral development Banks may support different components of the overall CORB fund




Public Disclosure
                       development, but this structure is not yet clear. The use of a common approach will be agreed upon once the partners
                       and their roles have been clearly identified. There is currently no co-financing under the project.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     1) Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Prior to Appraisal)
                     2) Draft Environmental and Social Commitments Plan (Prior to Appraisal).
                     3) Transboundary Environmental Assessment guidelines (TEAG) disclosed in both English and Portuguese on February
                     23, 2026.

                     During implementation, all TORs of TA activities to be supported by the Project will be screened to ensure consistency
                     with the applicable provisions of the ESF. Additional instruments to be defined in the ESCP.


                     During implementation, all TORs of TA activities to be supported by the Project will be screened to ensure consistency
                     with the applicable provisions of the ESF. Additional instruments to be defined in the ESCP.


                     III. CONTACT POINT



                    Mar 17, 2026                                                                                                       Page 11 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Cubango-okavango River Basin (corb): Financing Innovation In Transboundary Waters (P513349)



                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Anders Jagerskog                     Title:        Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                 Specialist

                      Email:                  ajagerskog@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Diego Juan Rodriguez                 Job Title:    Lead Economist

                      Email:                  drodriguez1@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                 Anders Jagerskog, Diego Juan Rodriguez



Public Disclosure
                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                        Juanita Whitfield

                     ADM Social Specialist:                               Aimonchok Tashieva




                    Mar 17, 2026                                                                                             Page 12 of 12
