Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 11/06/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04578




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Nov 10, 2025                                                                                Page 1 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P513815                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       READY-HP                    2026

                     Operation Name            Resilient Action for Development and Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     India                     India                                   SOUTH ASIA                   Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                                                    Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     India                     Department of Revenue (DM-Cell),        07-Nov-2025                  15-Dec-2025
                                               Government of Himachal Pradesh;
                                               Directorate of Energy; Public Works
                                               Department; Jal Shakti Vibhag




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     04-Nov-2025               412,500,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To support resilient disaster recovery and livelihoods, and increase state capacities for risk-informed development.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     Yes


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Cloudbursts, flash floods and landslide incidents triggered by heavy rain during the 2025 monsoon season (June to date)
                     have caused extensive impacts in Himachal Pradesh, resulting over 374 deaths and damages of about INR 4,156.28 Cr.
                     (about US$500.76 million). Damages are primarily driven by impacts to the transport infrastructure, public buildings,
                     power infrastructure, and water, sanitation and irrigation, while the livelihood sector additionally faces significant
                     indirect losses due to disrupted access to markets, significant reduction of tourist arrivals etc. These events follow
                     similarly devastating monsoon seasons in 2023 and 2024. These repeated extreme weather events have severely

                    Nov 10, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                     strained the state’s already constrained capacities, and substantial recovery needs from 2023 and 2024 remain unmet
                     emphasizing the urgency of a speedy and resilient reconstruction and recovery effort. The proposed project will support
                     the Government of Himachal Pradesh in advancing a resilient recovery process (transport corridors, public buildings,
                     water/sanitation/irrigation schemes, and energy supply) while strengthening institutional capacities for disaster risk
                     management, enhancing sectoral resilience for infrastructure sectors and supporting resilient livelihoods.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Himachal Pradesh is a Himalayan region mountain state with a geographical area of 55,673 sq. km. and constitutes
                     nearly 11 percent of the total area of the Himalayas. Himachal Pradesh lies on the southern slope of the Himalayan
                     range in the north-western part of India. The state is regarded as an almost wholly mountainous state having altitudes
                     ranging from 350 to 6,975 meters with climate conditions varying from semi-tropical to semi-arctic. Nearly 30 percent of
                     its geographical area is permanently under snow, and more than 66 percent is designated as forest.Himachal Pradesh’s
                     disaster vulnerability is further exacerbated by climate change, elevating the risk of cloudbursts, flash floods, landslides,
                     and debris flow incidents. Given the rising temperatures, increasing monsoon precipitation, and enhanced glacier melt,
                     a significant increase in peak runoff during the monsoon months is expected.

                     The total population of Himachal Pradesh is 6.8 million, comprising 50.72 percent males and 49.28 percent females
                     (Census 2011); nearly 90 percent live in rural areas. Agriculture is the main occupation and average holding size is about
                     1.00 ha; distribution of land holdings indicates that 87.95 percent are small and marginal farmers. Most rural families
                     access off farm incomes to supplement the shortfall from agriculture as the viability of holdings is becoming more



Public Disclosure
                     critical. The population comprises 24.3 percent of Scheduled Castes (SC) and 5.7 percent of Scheduled Tribes (ST) Three
                     major tribal areas in the state are Chamba (Pangi and Bharmour blocks), Kinnaur and Lahaul-Spiti districts. Project
                     locations may fall in these three tribal districts of the state or in locations with presence of tribals. In terms of workforce
                     participation, females constitute 44.82 percent of the total workforce. The number of women who have control over
                     use of land resources is more, because men stay away from the villages for their livelihoods. Routine usage of migrant
                     labor in construction activities, construction stage issues and impacts etc. are some relevant environment and social
                     aspects that would need to be considered as part of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA).

                     The monsoon seasons of 2023, 2024 and 2025, triggered by heavy rains, caused extensive damages, with the severe
                     impacts on public service infrastructure such as transport; water, sanitation and irrigation; and public power supply. In
                     addition to the direct damages to public service infrastructure, indirect losses occurred from disruptions due to
                     landslides, floods, soil erosion etc, which severely affected livelihoods sectors including tourism, agriculture and
                     horticulture.

                     Given the state’s unique ecological and social landscape, all infrastructure development must be based on robust hazard
                     analytics and network risk assessments.

                     The sub-project locations under READY-HP are in disaster affected zones across the state requiring reliable and resilient
                     access to transport connectivity, water and sanitation services and power supply, but exposed to high seismic risk and
                     the threats of extreme weather events, in particular flooding and landslides.




                    Nov 10, 2025                                                                                                         Page 3 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     A Project Management Unit (PMU) will be maintained within Disaster Management Cell of the Revenue Department for
                     overall coordination and implementation via three PIUs within the following implementing agencies: (i) Jal Shakti
                     Vibagh (JSV), to manage works/activities related to water intake structures, water treatment plants, pumping systems,
                     water distribution, sanitation and irrigation systems infrastructure, (ii) Directorate of Energy (DoE) to manage
                     works/activities related to restoring power supply, transmission and distribution, (iii) Public Works Department (PWD)
                     to manage activities relating to resilient reconstruction of priority transport corridors, including roads with related slope
                     stabilization works, drainage and culverts; bridges with related scouring protection; bridle bridges; and critical public
                     buildings including hospitals, schools and multi-purpose relief shelters.

                     In terms of prior experience on management of E&S aspects, the Revenue Department (PMU) has some prior
                     experience impementing the E&S aspects in the Agence Française de Développement (AFD) funded Disaster Risk
                     Reduction and Preparedness project in Himachal Pradesh and DoE (PIU) is implementing the World Bank funded
                     Himachal Pradesh Power Sector Development Program (P176032)- a PforR operation in which the systems and lessons
                     on E&S risk management are being addressed at the state level. However, the World Bank’s Environment and Social
                     Framework (ESF) in terms of scope, application and requirements is new to all the four implementing agencies -
                     Revenue Department, JSV, DoE and PWD. Hence, experienced E&S consultants will need to be contracted to ensure
                     proper mainstreaming of E&S aspects during preparation and implementation phases.

                     Given the complexity of the project and institutional challenge, the Department of Revenue (PMU) shall: (i) designate a
                     Nodal E&S Officer to coordinate E&S aspects across the three PIUs, liaise with and report to World Bank; (ii) designate




Public Disclosure
                     or hire a Communications Specialist to ensure high quality stakeholder engagement; and (iii) hire Third-Party agency for
                     Concurrent Monitoring of E&S actions and commitments. Each PIU shall: designate and/or hire full time Environmental
                     specialists, Social specialists and OHS specialists supported by subject specialists for gender, labor, and biodiversity in
                     the Project Management Consultant (PMC) agency hired by each PIU. Furthermore, the three PIUs will engage an
                     independent consulting firm to prepare subproject-level E&S instruments e.g., ESIAs, ESMPs, BMPs, RAPs.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                  High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                           High
                     Environmental risk rating is categorized as High due to the significant potential for adverse environmental impacts
                     stemming from the (i) project’s geographic setting in fragile disaster-prone mountainous terrain with ecologically
                     sensitive areas/features; (ii) nature of infrastructure interventions focused on improvement, rehabilitation and
                     resilent reconstruction of existing/damaged assets and involment of some new (greenfield) constuction; and (iii)
                     limited familiarity/prior experience of the implementing agencies on the application and implementation of risk
                     management requirements of the World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF). Large dams or large scale
                     hydropower projects are excluded from this project. Key environmental risks and impacts envisaged include: (a)
                     potential impacts on natural environment arising from sub-project locations within or near environmentally sensitive
                     features/areas (such as interventions on forested areas and hilly terrain; (b) improvement, rehabilitation and resilient


                    Nov 10, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                     reconstruction activities of each infrastructure asset type, namely (i) priority transport corridors, including roads with
                     requisite slope stabilization, drainage, culvert improvements and road safety considerations; bridges with erosion
                     protection; bridle bridges; and critical public buildings such as hospitals, schools and multi-purpose relief shelters; (ii)
                     water supply, sewage/sanitation and irrigation schemes; and (iii) power supply, transmission and distribution.; (c)
                     disruption of services/usage during retrofitting works of critical public buildings such as hospitals, schools and multi-
                     purpose relief shelters; (d) OHS risks, debris/waste management, dust and noise during execution of improvement,
                     rehabilitation and reconstruction activities and; (e) constraints in capacity to deal with environmental, health and
                     safety (EHS) issues in geographically dispersed sub-projects involving multiple planning and implementation entities.
                                                                                                                                              High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risk rating is categorized as High. Key social risks and impacts envisaged at this stage include: (a) taking of
                     private land and assets at certain locations for above mentioned works, permanent and temporary displacement; (b)
                     difficulty in identification of owners as land parcels at many locations may have either got washed away and/or
                     damaged; (c) impacts on livelihood due to land take, restrictions on access to/use of forest land and resources and
                     also construction works that are likely to be prolonged in duration; (d) potential impacts on tribals groups that meet
                     the ESS 7 criteria as some investments might take place in such locations; (e) labor, labor influx, community health
                     and safety as well as SEA/SH since much of the construction labor is sourced from other states; (f) possible exclusion
                     of vulnerable groups from such recovery efforts due to inadequate stakeholder engagement and communication; and
                     (g) lack of familiarity and weak capacity of some of the PIUs. Sub-projects’ ESIAs will identify if there are any
                     Associated Facilities which will also be required to comply with the ESMF.




Public Disclosure
                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                     Relevant

                      As stated in the ESCP, in order to manage the E&S impacts and risks noted above, the PMU - Revenue Department
                      and three PIUs (JSV, DOE and PWD) will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                      including Labor Management Procedure (LMP), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Policy
                      Framework (IPPF) and any other necessary frameworks such as principles to assess and manage impacts and risks on
                      biodiveristy features that should be in conformity with national and state legal and regulatory frameworks as well as
                      the relevant ESSs. The ESMF shall (a) identify the E&S risks envisaged from project activities; (b) lay out the
                      procedures for screening sub-projects and sub-project level Environment and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs); (c)
                      provide template for Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and/or other instruments depending on
                      the impacts and risks identified during the E&S screening and scoping process; (d) list out monitoring and reporting
                      requirements; and (e) stipulate capacity development measures. The ESMF will guide the preparation of sub-project
                      level ESIAs, ESMPs, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), and as necessary Indigenous People Development Plans
                      (IPDPs), Waste management Plans (WMPs) and Biodiversity Management Plans (BMPs). The ESMF will include
                      Environmental and Social Codes of Practice (ESCOPs) and standard ESMPs for use by the PIUs and contractors during
                      the implementation of low- to moderate-risk subprojects. Including such an approach/instrument may prove useful
                      and enable the timely initiation of urgent works, without the need to prepare subproject-specific ESIAs/ESMPs in
                      every case, while still ensuring compliance with the relevant ESS requirements. These documents as per the already


                    Nov 10, 2025                                                                                                         Page 5 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                      prepared Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be disclosed and subjected to stakeholder meaningful consultation
                      and engagement prior to implemention As regards to the SEP, these agencies will also ensure continuous
                      engagement with identified stakeholders, disclose project information and redress grievances. All pre-construction-
                      related mitigation, including land acquisition, resettlement, and statutory clearances, will be completed prior to
                      commencement of civil works. In addition, the Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) Manual will
                      include specific provisions for E&S screening and risk management consistent with ESSs. Draft ESCP and SEP
                      documents have been prepared, are disclosed together with this ESRS, and will also be disclosed by the PMU before
                      appraisal completion. In addition to physical infrastructure intervention, the project includes systematic, state-level
                      technical assistance activities, such as flood zoning, development control regulations, and early warning and decision-
                      support systems. The ESMF will include: (a) guidelines to address potential E&S risks and impacts from any
                      downstream interventions, if and as applicable; (b) screening criteria; (c) exclusion lists, and (d) guidance to ensure
                      biodiversity risks are appropriately assessed and managed during subproject preparation.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      A SEP has been prepared that provides for continued engagement of all relevant stakeholders of the project –
                      affected persons and institutions such as schools, temples; other interested parties; communities; institutional
                      stakeholders including relevant government departments such as revenue, pollution control board etc., police
                      department shopkeeper associations; civil works contractors, project management and construction supervision
                      consultants, service providers such as: NGOs who are expected tobe involved for RAP implementation and GBV risk
                      mitigation plan. During project preparation stage, as roads were damaged resulting in restricted and on occasions
                      unsafe access, only limited consultations by JSV with few stakeholders were possible. These few consultations helped



Public Disclosure
                      to inform the communities about the various projects and elicit their concerns. However, more will be undertaken as
                      road connectivity and access improves and once E&S personnel are brought on board by these agencies. The SEP
                      details the nature, modes and frequency of engagement with these stakeholders commensurate to the interests and
                      relevance in the project activities, besides specifying the monitoring and reporting requirements on SEP
                      implementation. Project stakeholders shall be involved through various means, including surveys, focused
                      consultations, training and orientation events on project scope, components and E&S issues (construction contractors
                      and project management), periodic meetings and workshops (institutional stakeholders such as forest, revenue,
                      police department). Disadvantaged and vulnerable communities include Women Headed Households (WHH), Elderly
                      People, Persons with Disabilities (PWD), Scheduled Castes (SC), People Below Poverty Line (BPL), Scheduled Tribes,
                      Community members in remote areas. These groups shall be engaged through focus group discussions, and
                      consultation meetings that will be organized. Each of the agencies has its own Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM),
                      besides which they also respond to grievances received from the State level MMSS (Mukhya Mantri (Chief Minister)
                      Seva Sankalp) Helpline. There are multiple GRMs in the state such as Citizen Seva, Samadhan Shivirs (Resolution
                      forums that are face to face or in-person events), SAMGR ESAMADHAN, CM SEWA SANKALP Helpline (1100) or MMSS
                      (Mukhya Mantri Sewa Sankalp) and grievances received on these portals also get routed to these PIUs. These GRMs
                      include functions relating to receiving grievances through multiple modes, acknowledgement, sorting and processing
                      at the field/division/HQ levels, resolution within prescribed timelines and escalation provisions, closure of grievances
                      and monitoring. The SEP details the GRM processes and timelines that shall be followed in receiving and redressing
                      grievances. As noted above, the Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan is disclosed together with this ESRS and will also
                      be disclosed by the Revenue Department, DoE, PWD and JSV on their respective websites.




                    Nov 10, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      PMU and three PIUs would contract agencies to undertake civil works, agencies/firms and other implementation
                      support partners such as Project Management Consultant (PMC) and Construction Supervision Consultants (CSCs).
                      The categories of workers to be engaged are direct workers, contracted workers including migrant labor, and possibly
                      community workers (volunteers). The risks will include: (i) non-payment of wages or benefits (compensation, bonus,
                      maternity benefits by employers; (ii) discrimination based on race, caste, gender or other social characteristics
                      potentially resulting barriers for employment; (iii) abrupt termination, or differentiated working conditions, wages or
                      benefits, among others; Based on other projects in the state and sectors, it has been identified that the national legal
                      provision on labor almost covers all ESS2 requirements, except requirements relating to community workers and a
                      functional GRM for different types of workers. In consideration of these key gaps, a Labor Management Procedure
                      (LMP) will be developed clearly laying down and spelling out (i) the requirements relating to provision of terms and
                      conditions of employment; ii) promoting of non-discrimination and equal opportunity; iii) allowing the constitution
                      worker’s organization and collective bargain, among other key ESS2 requirement; iv) provisions from applicable
                      national laws and ESS 2 requirements that prohibit the use of child labor and forced labor; v) the requirement of
                      setting up a workers’ mechanism to redress grievances will be established and available to direct and contracted
                      workers. Skilled labor force, if unavailable locally, may need to be brought in from outside the project area either
                      from within or outside the state and therefore, Workers’ Camp Management Plans will be developed as needed.
                      Given the mountainous terrain involving fragile areas with landslides, etc. and already damaged sites, OHS will be a
                      serious risk to manage. The template ESMP to be included within the ESMF will require to outline the various
                      measures that need to be considered to prepare contractor’s OHS plan which will be part of Contractor’s ESMP (C-
                      ESMP). Contracts for the Project Management Consultant (PMC), Construction Supervision Consultants (CSCS) and



Public Disclosure
                      contractors will include the requirement of dedicated OHS specialists responsible for implementing and monitoring
                      OHS plans at construction sites.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      For improving resource efficiency in the reconstruction works (particularly, critical public buildings such as hospitals,
                      schools and multi-purpose relief shelters) the considerations/measures in the planning/design/DPR preparation
                      would include (a) improving natural light and ventilation (when possible, depending on the nature/type of retrofitting
                      work proposed), (b) increasing water efficiency and, (c) enhancing energy efficiency. For pollution prevention and
                      management covering improvement, rehabilitation and resilent reconstruction activities of (i) priority transport
                      corridors, including roads with requisite slope stabilization, drainage, culvert improvements and road safety
                      considerations; bridges with erosion protection; bridle bridges; and critical public buildings such as hospitals, schools
                      and multi-purpose relief shelters; (ii) water supply, sewage/sanitation and irrigation schemes; and (iii) power supply,
                      transmission and distribution lines, the focus during sub-project design will be on: (a) debris/construction waste
                      management; (b) run-off/silt control at work sites to prevent sedimentation and possible contamination of water
                      sources during construction phase; (c) measures for controlling dust and noise pollution; (d) management of
                      hazardous wastes (if any, which will be ascertained as part of sub-project assessment/ ESIAs) and, (e) storage and
                      management of construction materials to prevent ground/soil contamination. During operational phase of improved,
                      rehabiltated and reconstrctured facilities, resource efficient/resilient design and construction methods will be
                      strengthened by integrating appropriate approaches into the existing policies, procedures, and project planning
                      systems of these agencies. To create an enabling mechanism for integrating resource efficiency and pollution
                      prevention/management, the basic requirements will be incorporated in the ESMF’s generic ESMP. These will be

                    Nov 10, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                      further developed as part of the sub-project design/DPR preparation and reflected in the site-specific ESIA/ESMPs.
                      Specifically for the landslide/slope protection works, bio-engineering solutions will be introduced as effective,
                      affordable, environmentally friendly, and ecologically sustainable solutions.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      The project expects to have positive impact on the community during the operation phase by increasing the
                      accessibility and road safety. However, preliminary assessments have identified environmental and social risks and
                      impacts on sensitive receptors identified under ESS4 consider vulnerability to risk due to natural calamities like,
                      landslides and even at times may be landslide triggered due to construction work. The construction activities related
                      impacts such as fugitive dust from earthworks, hill cutting; proneness to landslide/slides due to disturbing already
                      stable hill slope during excavation and disposal of excavated material; impact on community health and safety due to
                      as these will be in proximity to many damaged areas where reconstruction/new construction works will be
                      undertaken. There is also possibility of SEA/SH arising from large influx of migrant workers, particularly in sensitive
                      locations such as hospitals, schools, etc. that are near to habitations; Health risks of labour relating to HIV/AIDS and
                      other sexually transmitted diseases. In order to address labor influx, contractors will prepare a Labor Influx
                      Management Plan (as part of the Contractor ESMP) that shall comprise provisions for sourcing all unskilled labor from
                      within the project area and its vicinity to minimize labor influx into the project area. Majority of these impacts are
                      location specific that could be addressed through management and mitigation measures in the Environmental and
                      Social Management Plans (ESMPs) resulting from the sub-project specific ESIAs. These ESMPs will outline Contractor
                      responsibilities during project planning, implementation and monitoring and evaluation of plans (for muck disposal,
                      wastes management plan, traffic management plan, OHS, emergency response etc.) for which contractor is mandated



Public Disclosure
                      to prepare a Contractor ESMP. The ESMP will also include a SEA/SH risk mitigation plan to address the potential risks
                      and impacts that might arise from the influx of migrant labor. The C-ESMP shall also develop a Labor influx
                      management plan and also provide necessary sensitization and awareness training on HIV/AIDS and other sexually
                      transmitted diseases to construction workers and community besides ensuring availability of necessary STD
                      preventive materials.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      The potential land-related impacts include: (i) taking of private land and assets at certain locations for above
                      mentioned works leading to permanent and temporary displacement; (ii) difficulty in identification of owners as land
                      parcels are either got washed away and/or damaged; (iii) impacts on livelihood due to land take, restrictions on
                      access to or use of forest land and resources resulting from construction works that are likely to be prolonged in
                      duration. The structures fully or partially impacted are likely to include: residential, commercial and residential –cum-
                      commercial; and common property resources such as boundary walls of school, colleges, religious or culturally
                      sensitive locations, bus stops / stations, to name a few. The identified risks include: (i) inadequate coordination
                      between concerned agencies on land acquisition and resettlement; (ii) mismatches between design drawings and
                      revenue maps, particularly as lands have been washed away or damaged; and (iii) delays in negotiations for direct
                      purchase of land and disbursements. The current land taking practices of the implementing agencies are as follows:
                      (a) JSV adopts a method of direct purchase for land taking of siting of its water supply and sanitation infrastructure.
                      For this purpose, it constitutes a purchase committee in accordance with the national act on land acquisition and it is
                      performed under willing-buyer-seller negotiation not typically subjected to expropriation; (b) PWD, for state funded
                      projects, uses the method of taking land vide Gift Deeds, which basically requires landowner to donate the required


                    Nov 10, 2025                                                                                                      Page 8 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                      parcel of land without any payment. However, in case of externally funded projects, PWD uses acquisition, direct
                      purchase and pays compensation and assistances as per provisions under the applicable national and state acts and
                      also complies with norms of the concerned funding agency; (c) DoE uses direct purchase for land take, after issuing
                      initial notification under the LA Act. In cases of transmission lines and towers, compensation for the land (trees and
                      crops) under the ROW and under the tower footings is paid as per the applicable national (Telegraph and Electricity)
                      acts; and finally (d) Revenue Department (PMU) is likely to take land for livelihood related activities and it uses direct
                      willing buyer/seller purchase method which is not subjected to expropriation or forced evictions. Based on a
                      comparison of provisions of the national and State level acts, the methods of taking land and compensating as
                      described above, and in WB ESS 5, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to address these gaps
                      with commensurate measures and provisions to ensure compliance with ESS5 requirements. The RPF will guide the
                      preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), if and when required and provide compensation template for non-
                      title holder encroachers and squatters; subsistence grant; shifting assistances; notice to vacate occupied land and
                      provisions to salvage the affected materials. For the disadvantaged and vulnerable groups such as SC, STs, below
                      poverty line families, women headed households, and elderly above 60 yrs, the RPF will include provisions for
                      additional assistances such as resettlement allowance, training for skill development, subsistence grant, among other
                      potential options. The RPF, will also provide the relevant linkages to existing GRMs available in all three PIUs and the
                      PMU.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The reconstruction/recovery activities of key public assets services namely transport (roads and bridges); public



Public Disclosure
                      buildings; water, sanitation and irrigation; and energy supply under Component 2 are expected to pose risks and
                      impacts on natural habitats. These impacts are largely envisaged to be limited and localized in context, but given the
                      uncertainty associated with the proposed sub-projects cannot be minimized. To avoid/minimize/mitigate such
                      impacts, an E&S screening exercise will be carried out early in the project cycle to identify whether subprojects are
                      located in or near ecologically sensitive areas or biodiversity hotspots. Then, biodiversity assessments are conducted
                      as part of the site-specific ESIAs and ESMPs when such ecological sensitivities are identified. For such sub-projects,
                      the principles, and requirements of ESS6 including application of mitigation hierarchy when possible, will be applied
                      in addition to the integration of due environmental/ecological considerations in planning & engineering designs of
                      works and closer implementation/monitoring of ESMPs. Based on findings/recommendations of the E&S screening
                      exercise for each sub-project, a Biodiversity Management Plan (BMP) may be prepared in accordance with the
                      guidelines in the ESMF and as a annex of the ESMP and in full alignment with the not-net-loss (NNL) and net gain (NG)
                      requirements under ESS6 for Natural and Critical Habitats, respectively. The ESMF will include screening criteria,
                      exclusion lists, and guidance to ensure biodiversity risks are appropriately assessed and managed during subproject
                      preparation. As noted in the ESCP, these proposed mitigation measures shall be applied to complement the
                      application, implementation, and monitoring of applicable regulatory/legal norms of Government of India and
                      Government. of Himachal Pradesh.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                               Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      Indigenous People (IP) from designated Tribal or Schedule V areas exist in the districts of Lahaul Spiti, Kinnaur and
                      Chamba (Pangi and Barmour blocks). At present, there are some water supply and santitation sub-projects of JSV that


                    Nov 10, 2025                                                                                                       Page 9 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                      might be taken up in Kinnaur district. There could be some sub-projects in locations that might have tribal groups that
                      meet the ESS7 criteria - these will be known only when ESIA of sub-projects are conducted. An Indigenous Peoples
                      Policy Framework (IPPF) will be prepared based on national and state laws and as per ESS 7 and integrated into the
                      ESMF to guide the preparation of IPDPs (or TDPs) during implementation where necessary for sub-projects. During
                      the ESIA processes, the need to obtain Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) from affected IPs will be determined.
                      The IPPF will require that FPIC shall be obtained when reconstruction or new construction works are identified to
                      have significant adverse impacts on IP’s land and natural resources; cause relocation of IPs; or have significant impact
                      on IP’s cultural heritage.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      Himachal Pradesh is a land with many layers of history, culture, ethnicity, and religion. Given the vast geographical
                      coverage of the Project, there is a possibility of cultural heritage related concerns coming up in certain sub-projects.
                      These are primarily expected to be indirect and may occur due to inadequacies in design/Detailed Project Reports
                      (DPRs) or delays in timely execution of measures incorporated in the ESMPs. Such sub-projects will be identified for
                      potential cultural heritage impacts using the E&S screening procedures early-on in the sub-project preparation cycle.
                      Consultation mechanisms with stakeholders will also be utilized to screen and identify any sensitive issues related to
                      tangible and/or intangible cultural resources. The requirements would be integrated into the ESMF via a Cultural
                      Heritage Management Framework (CHMF). The CHMP should outline principles, screening procedures, and tools to
                      identify, assess, manage cultural heritage risks and procedures for handling chance finds across subprojects. As part
                      of the ESIAs to be carried out for sub-projects, potential direct or indirect impacts on cultural assets will be identified
                      and assessed to determine the presence of resources that may be of local cultural significance. Depending on the



Public Disclosure
                      nature and scale of identified risks, mitigation measures will be prepared and integrated into the sub-projects’ ESMPs
                      via a Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP) indicating specific guidance for the preservation, documentation, or
                      relocation of identified resources. For activities located in or near culturally sensitive areas, site-specific CHMPs will
                      be prepared as part of the subproject ESMPs. Furthermore, the CHMP will be included in the bidding documents
                      through the site-specific sub project ESMPs to handle any such situation that may come up during execution of
                      civil/infrastructure works. Cultural heritage management actions under the project will involve culturally appropriate
                      and inclusive consultations with local communities, traditional custodians of the heritage, and relevant authorities as
                      outlined in the draft SEP. The chance finds procedures and measures to protect heritage will comply with national
                      legislation and the World Bank’s ESS8. Such a commitment is also reflected in the ESCP.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features



                    Nov 10, 2025                                                                                                       Page 10 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                       In Part
                       Borrower's framework relating to labor, information disclosure and land taking of private land as per national and
                       state acts will be used.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       There are no other financing partners

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     1.      Designate Nodal E&S officer within the PMU (Department of Revenue) who will manage i) concurrent Third
                     Party Monitoring Agency under the PMU; ii) coordinate with all PIUs on E&S aspects and iii) liase and report to Bank
                     2.      Designate and/or hire full time qualified Environmental specialists, Social specialists, Occupational Health and
                     Safety (OHS) specialists and subject specialists in gender, labor, and biodiversity to three (3) PIUs within 45 days of
                     project negotiations.
                     3.      Prepare a ESMF within two (2) months after Effective Date, including E&S Screening process, Generic ESMPs,
                     OHS, Road Safety, RPF, LMP, SEA/SH Prevention and Response Plan
                     4.      Develop a Training and Capacity Building plan for E&S staff, consultants and contractors personnel no later than
                     one(1) months after the Effective Date.




Public Disclosure
                     5.      Based on the ESMF, prepare sub-projects’ ESIAs, ESMPs, LMPs, RAPs, IPDPs, WMPs and BMPs and any other
                     relevant instrument prior to issuance of tender for civil works




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Anup Karanth                           Title:          Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                    Specialist

                      Email:                 akaranth@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Melanie Simone Kappes                  Job Title:      Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                      Email:                 mkappes@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Nov 10, 2025                                                                                                   Page 11 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Resilient Action For Development And Disaster Recovery Himachal Pradesh (P513815)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                Anup Karanth, Melanie Simone Kappes

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                       Joseph Ese Akpokodje

                     ADM Social Specialist:                              Gopalaswamy Srihari




Public Disclosure




                    Nov 10, 2025                                                                                  Page 12 of 12
