Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Jammu and Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic and Tourism Development Project (P513389)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Sep-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01446




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Jammu and Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic and Tourism Development Project (P513389)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
India                          P513389                       Jammu and Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic and
                                                             Tourism Development Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
SOUTH ASIA                     24-Oct-2025                   18-Dec-2025                    Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Government of India           Tourism Department
Financing (IPF)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To strengthen resilient service delivery and promote local jobs in selected tourism destinations


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                         575.00

  Total Financing                                                                                              575.00
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                400.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                400.00
  Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Counterpart Funding                                                                                         175.00


                                                                                                                    Page 1



                                                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Jammu and Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic and Tourism Development Project (P513389)


       Borrower/Recipient                                                                                           175.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                     Concept Review Decision
Substantial




 Other Decision (as needed)



 B. Introduction and Context

 Sectoral and Institutional Context
1.      Jammu and Kashmir (J&K), home to 12.2 million people (2011 Census), reflects in microcosm many of the
opportunities and challenges shaping India’s tourism sector. Endowed with abundant natural resources and relatively
strong human capital, it is well-positioned to benefit from the sector’s growth trajectory. Yet its economic performance
has consistently lagged peer states. Youth unemployment is high at 17.4 percent (vs. 10.2 percent nationally), especially
in urban areas at 28.5 percent (vs. 14.7 percent nationally). Volatility, along with the constraints of being landlocked and
ecologically fragile, has hindered long-term growth. Persistent service deficits—despite recent progress—continue to limit
J&K’s ability to fully harness the tourism-driven growth and job creation opportunities that can help to reduce poverty
and boost prosperity.
2.       Tourism is one of J&K’s most promising economic sectors. J&K’s natural beauty and niche tourism offerings have
driven a recent surge in visitors, with marked acceleration post-COVID. Tourism contributes approximately 7% of GSDP,
directly and indirectly supporting two million jobs—equivalent to livelihoods for nearly 16% of the population. The sector
creates diverse opportunities in hospitality, transport, guiding, and related services, often through SMEs. It also serves as
an important entry point for youth and women into the labor market, helping them build transferable skills. Tourism links
directly to two of J&K’s key economic drivers—handicrafts and horticulture—providing markets for skilled artisans and
rural producers, and dispersing benefits to poorer and more remote communities.
3.       Private sector participation can help harness this potential, creating more jobs and opportunities for local
communities. Interest from the private sector is growing, evidenced by the entry of internationally branded hotel chains
alongside a robust base of small family-run accommodations. With adequate supporting services, J&K can unlock
significantly greater levels of private capital mobilization, including through public–private partnerships.
4.       However, structural challenges constrain the sector’s development. These include inadequate last-mile
connectivity, limited basic services at key sites, weak community participation, and low capacity for coordinated spatial
planning, destination management, and promotion. Many sites lack master plans, resulting in fragmented, ad hoc growth
and missed investment opportunities. While Tourism Development Agencies (TDAs) have been established at the district
level to lead destination-level initiatives, their capacity remains limited.




                                                                                                                         Page 2



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Jammu and Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic and Tourism Development Project (P513389)


5.      Environmental and social sustainability remain critical to the sector’s growth. Experience from similar mountain
geographies shows that the absence of effective planning and regulation can lead to unregulated development that
threatens fragile ecosystems, risks overcrowding, and can concentrate tourism benefits among a few actors. Limited
community engagement in planning undermines local ownership and long-term stewardship. Without intervention, J&K
risks replicating the degradation seen in other mountain states where unplanned tourism has eroded both the
environment and visitor appeal.
6.      Recognizing these risks and opportunities, J&K’s Tourism Development Policy (2021) emphasizes equitable,
ecologically sensitive growth. The strategy calls for diversifying tourism offerings, creating an enabling environment for
private capital, improving branding and market access, and reducing territorial disparities.
7.     The Government of India has requested World Bank support to advance the tourism agenda in J&K by
demonstrating sustainable tourism approaches, creating jobs, and prioritizing the sharing of benefits with local
communities. This proposed engagement aims to unlock the full potential of tourism to create jobs and growth while
safeguarding J&K’s unique natural assets.
8.      There is a strong link between the proposed Project and the World Bank Group’s priority on jobs as a path to
prosperity. The WBG identified Tourism as one of five sectors that could generate local jobs at scale. Specifically,
sustainable models that leverage eco-tourism, digital platforms, and climate-smart infrastructure can maximize economic
benefits and direct and indirect job creation, while preserving cultural and natural heritage.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 9.      To strengthen resilient service delivery and promote local jobs in selected tourism destinations.

  Key Results (From PCN)
 10.     The proposed Project will measure progress toward the PDO via the following proposed indicators:
         •   New or better jobs, including number for women and youth (number)
         •   Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks (number)
         •   People benefiting from improved access to resilient services (number, percentage, gender disaggregated)
         •   Increased tourism spending in project-supported tourism clusters (US$ per day)

 D. Concept Description

11.     The proposed Project aims to enhance tourism offerings in selected destinations, position tourism as a driver
of jobs and inclusive growth, safeguard natural assets, and create meaningful employment for youth.
12.     The proposed Project will target selected demonstration destinations, chosen on the basis of accessibility,
community ownership, private sector potential, and livelihood impact. Each destination will be developed within a
clustered tourism circuit connecting niche products—such as adventure, handicrafts, and wellness—to broader value
chains, maximizing economic multipliers. These destinations will show how integrated climate-smart tourism can drive
local economic growth and create jobs.
13.    The design adopts a two-pronged intervention strategy through a framework approach to deliver both early
impact and long-term sustainability:


                                                                                                                      Page 3



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Jammu and Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic and Tourism Development Project (P513389)


       - Integrated Tourism Products, Destination Planning, and Management – Strengthening local capacity and market
         positioning to enable tourism-led local economic development.
       - Integrated Infrastructure and Service Delivery – Implementing area-based investment packages to enhance tourist
         experiences and improve livability and livelihoods for host communities, thereby creating conditions for sustained
         private sector participation.
Proposed Project Components
14.     Component 1: Strategic tourism planning and local economic development ($70 million). This component will
support strategic planning and create an enabling environment for private sector participation to bolster the
development of selected tourism destinations. It will identify priority tourism circuits and define the role of each
destination within the broader tourism ecosystem. Key analytics, such as assessments of value chain, carrying capacity,
and disaster risk, will inform investments across critical aspects of sustainable and nature-positive tourism-led
development.
15.    Component 2: Service delivery for growth and jobs ($300 million). This component will support interrelated
investments to enhance tourist sites and improve service delivery in host areas. The aim is to enhance the tourist
experience while improving livability and livelihood opportunities for local communities.
16.     Component 3: Project management ($30 million). This component will cover the costs of project management
and implementation. This includes administrative costs, training and capacity building, especially in procurement and
financial management; Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) activities; as well as the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
Management and monitoring.
17.       The proposed Project design will ensure alignment with World Bank Group’s corporate commitments:
      a) Private capital mobilization. The proposed Project will strengthen the sector’s foundations by leveraging
         synergies across tourism-related industries, expanding investment opportunities, and addressing gaps that deter
         private investment in tourism assets. Support will be extended to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs),
         homestays, and community enterprises, thus leveraging also local capital. The proposed Project will also enhance
         Public-Private-Partnership preparation and execution.
      b) Gender. During preparation, the proposed Project will explore activities to close critical gender gaps. This may
         include supporting women-led MSMEs, particularly in sectors such as handloom and floriculture, by enhancing
         productivity and improving market linkages to boost incomes. It may also include expanding women’s access to
         employment by creating opportunities in the tourism service industry.
      c) Paris Alignment. The proposed Project aligns with the Paris Agreement’s adaptation and mitigation goals. On
         adaptation, it enhances climate-resilient service delivery and creates diversified income opportunities in the face
         of risks such as flooding, landslides, avalanches, and glacial retreat. On mitigation, it will finance universally aligned
         activities while promoting low-carbon alternatives and nature-based solutions.
      d) Climate Co-Benefits. The proposed Project is expected to have substantial climate co-benefits, enhancing
         resilience and promoting low-impact tourism, green mobility, and energy-efficient solutions.
      e) Citizen engagement. The proposed Project will engage citizens and stakeholders in the selected destinations to
         expand local livelihoods and employment and to support inclusive tourism models. During preparation, existing
         helplines and grievance redress mechanisms in the tourism sector will be assessed for accessibility,
         responsiveness, and effectiveness to identify gaps and recommend improvements.




                                                                                                                              Page 4



                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Jammu and Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic and Tourism Development Project (P513389)


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                        Policies                                                         Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                 No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                           Yes



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

Footnote: According to OP 7.60, the Bank may support a project in a disputed area if the other claimants have no objection or the
Bank determines that the project is not harmful to the interests of the other claimants. Based on the proposed Project activities as
approved at the concept review, management has provisionally determined that the approved project activities appear unlikely to be
harmful to the interests of the other claimant, within the meaning of paragraph 3(b)(ii) of the policy. As the project activities are
more fully determined during preparation, the project team will conduct a more detailed assessment in consultation with the Legal
Vice Presidency and provide a written memorandum with a more definitive determination on the application of paragraph 3(b)(i) of
OP/BP 7.60. If, based on that memorandum, management at the decision point determines that the special circumstances set out in
that paragraph apply to the proposed Project and that all other elements of project preparation are on track, the team will be
permitted to complete appraisal followed by negotiations. By supporting the proposed Project, the Bank does not make any
judgment on the legal or other status of the territories concerned or the rights or interests of any party, nor does it prejudice any
determination of the parties’ claims.

18.       The environmental and social risk rating for the proposed Project is assessed as Substantial. This rating reflects
the scale and geographic distribution of proposed investments across environmentally and socially sensitive areas and
client risk management capacities.
19.      Environmental risks may include erosion, slope destabilization, construction-related pollution, vegetation loss,
disturbance to local bird habitats, and air and noise emissions. If not properly managed, the cumulative impacts of tourism
could degrade environmental quality and ecosystem services. Nonetheless, the proposed Project offers innovative
approaches to sustainable tourism development and strong potential to promote environmental sustainability and
conservation, integrating climate-resilient designs, nature-based solutions, and resource and energy efficiency into its
activities.
20.     The proposed Project areas encompass rural and semi-urban communities, whose livelihoods are closely tied to
agriculture, pastoralism, handicrafts, and seasonal tourism. Anticipated social risks include temporary access restrictions
and livelihood disruptions, land acquisition or use of community lands, labor-related risks, and potential exclusion of
vulnerable groups like scheduled tribes. The proposed Project presents transformative opportunities to enhance service
delivery, create employment, local entrepreneurship, and community-driven tourism.
21.       To manage these risks and meet the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework requirements, the
implementing agency will prepare and disclose relevant environmental and social instruments prior to Appraisal. These
will include the Environmental & Social Management Framework (ESMF), which will provide procedures for screening, risk
mitigation, and institutional responsibilities. The ESMF will include the Labor Management Plan, Environmental Codes of
Practice, and generic Environmental & Social Management Plans. In addition, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan will be
developed, a grievance redress mechanism operationalized, as well as a Resettlement Policy Framework, Tribal


                                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Jammu and Kashmir Sustainable Local Economic and Tourism Development Project (P513389)


Development Framework, and Cultural Heritage Management Framework. An Environmental & Social Commitment Plan
will be developed to agree on the actions, timelines, and responsibilities. All instruments will be disclosed prior to Appraisal
and consulted upon. Site-specific instruments will be prepared and disclosed for each investment. Additionally, a Social
and Environmental Strategic Assessment will be conducted during the first year of implementation to inform upstream
strategic decision-making, promote cumulative impact management, and integrate sustainability principles.
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Rosanna Nitti
   Senior Urban Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Government of India

 Implementing Agencies
  Tourism Department

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
 APPROVAL


 Task Team Leader(s):                         Rosanna Nitti

 Approved By

 Practice Manager/Manager:

 Country Director:




                                                                                                                           Page 6



                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
