Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                 Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01437




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                   Operation Name
Congo, Democratic              P513301                        DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in
Republic of                                                   Kinshasa Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN           15-Jul-2026                    28-Oct-2026                    Water
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Investment Project              Democratic Republic of        Ministry of Water
Financing (IPF)                the Congo                      Resources and Electricity

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To increase access to climate-resilient water supply and sanitation services in Kinshasa and to strengthen institutional
capacity for water service delivery.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                              500.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                   500.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                   200.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                   200.00
      IDA Credit                                                                                                 200.00



                                                                                                                       Page 1



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)



   Non-World Bank Group Financing
     Commercial Financing                                                                                         100.00
       Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                          100.00
     Other Sources                                                                                                200.00
       OPEC FUND                                                                                                  100.00
       African Development Bank                                                                                   100.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                    Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                     The review did authorize the preparation to continue



Other Decision (as needed)

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

 1.    The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) possesses significant economic potential, primarily driven by its vast
 natural resources and a population of approximately 109 million.i These demographic and resource endowments
 present opportunities for job creation and private investment. DRC has 52 percent of all freshwater resources and 23
 percent of internal renewable water resources in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).ii Despite its potential, the DRC remains one
 of the world's poorest countries, with an extreme poverty rate of 72.9 percent and a Human Development Index ranking
 of 179 out of 191.iii More than half of the DRC’s impoverished population resides in and around major urban areas.iv
 The country faces widespread gender inequality and high rates of violence against women.
 2.     To fully unlock DRC’s potential, it is imperative to tackle binding development constraints such as infrastructure
 deficiencies, regulatory barriers, and political instability. DRC is one of the few developing countries that has not seen
 significant per-capita income growth since gaining independence in the 1960s. Moreover, the country’s heavy
 dependence on mining leaves it vulnerable to economic cycles of boom and bust. Finally, a high fertility rate has led to
 population growth levels that exceed the average in sub-Saharan Africa, challenging the efforts to achieve per capita
 income growth and poverty reduction. For example, sustained positive GDP growth during 2020-24, averaging over 6.4
 percent was insufficient to deliver significant improvements in per capita income. Similarly, although povertyv has
 declined from 78.9 percent of Congolese in 2020 to an estimated 72.9 percent in 2024, the figure remains exceedingly
 high. This outcome underscores the challenge of converting natural resource-driven growth into widespread
 improvements in living standards and the outstripping of basic services provision by the population growth.
 3.    DRC has an urbanization rate of approximately 44.5 percent but is urbanizing at income levels significantly
 below global comparators. The capital Kinshasa is a densely populated and fast-growing city of over 17 million people
 (2021), concentrating the highest number of people living in poverty compared to any other province in the DRC. About
 12 million "Kinois" live in poverty. Moreover, Kinshasa's population is growing faster than that of other urban areas,

                                                                                                                       Page 2



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)


at 5.1 per cent per year, compared to a national population growth of nearly 3.2 per cent. It could exceed 26 million
inhabitants in 2030.vi
4.     DRC is highly vulnerable to climate change, with large implications for people, infrastructure, and ecosystems.
DRC ranks as the 21st most vulnerable country and the fifth least ready to adapt, according to the Notre Dame Global
Adaptation Initiative Country Index.vii The country faces multiple climate change-exacerbated hazards, of which rainfall-
triggered floods and landslides are the most prevalent. The DRC’s Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR)viii
concludes that climate change is already making the country hotter, with more erratic rainfall – and both are likely to
accelerate in coming decades. More frequent extreme events and the resulting losses play a significant role in
perpetuating poverty, as they often impact low-income and vulnerable households, communities, small businesses, as
well as local and national governments. Floods and droughts lead to water service disruptions, and polluted waters due
to flood events negatively affect public health, specifically through water-borne illnesses such as cholera. Hence there
is a pressing need for more climate-resilient infrastructure.


Sectoral and Institutional Context
 5.    Due to the vast resources of the Congo basin and a high average annual rainfall of over 1,500 mm per year, the
 DRC is generally water rich. Internal renewable freshwater resources per capita are estimated at 12,213 m 3/person
 (2017)ix, significantly above the internationally recognized water sufficiency limit of 1,700 m3/person/year. Despite this
 abundance, access to safe and reliable water remains a challenge for many Congolese citizens. The total volume of
 freshwater withdrawn by major economic sectors is only about 0.2 percent of the total resource endowment. Decades
 of conflict, underinvestment, and lack of connectivity across the DRC’s vast territory have resulted in significant
 infrastructure gaps which are major constraints to sustainable and inclusive growth.
6.    The DRC has the largest population in Sub-Saharan Africa in terms of people without water, and third-largest
population after Nigeria and Ethiopia, lacking access to sanitation, and hygiene (WASH). As of 2024, about 70 million
people (64 percent) lack basic water access, 91 million people lack basic sanitation (84 percent), and 88 million people
lack basic hygiene services (81 percent).x Kinshasa in particular is facing a severe water supply and sanitation crisis, as
population growth continuously surpasses the pace of service provision. More than 8 million people in the city (48 per
cent) do not have access to a reliable basic water supply and this number is increasing exponentially with strong annual
urbanization trends. The proportion of households with access to piped water, mostly outdoors, has reduced from about
72 per cent in 2018 to 52 per cent in 2022.xi
7.     Kinshasa’s water supply system is under severe strain with only about 60% of current demand met. The city
relies primarily on two major treatment plants located in the central part of the city: the aging Ndjili plant (330,000
m³/day capacity) and the recently commissioned Ozone Water Treatment Plant (330,000 m³/day), financed under the
Kinshasa Multisector Development and Urban Resilience Project (“Kin Elenda”, P171141). The Ozone plant draws water
from the Congo River, but Ndjili suffers frequent breakdowns due to obsolete equipment, flooding, and severe pollution
of the River Ndjili. Additional smaller facilities, such as Lemba-Imbu, Ngaliema, Lukunga and Lukaya, operate at limited
capacity and face recurrent outages due to similar challenges. Overall, the city faces a severe water production deficit
of more than 1,000,000 m3/day, to meet current and future water demand by 2050.xii The city’s water supply
infrastructure is characterized by aging assets, uneven coverage, and vulnerability to climate shocks, leaving peri-urban
areas underserved. The eastern, western and southern parts of the city have very limited water supply infrastructure.
8.    The Government of DRC prepared a 2020-2030 National Program for Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
(Programme National d’Eau, Hygiène et Assainissement, PNEHA). It lays out investments required to reach the
ambitious access targets of 80 percent for urban water, 60 percent for rural water, 70 percent for sanitation and
universal access in schools and health centers by 2030. The PNEHA, budgeted at US$ 8 billion, has several subprograms
and involves all relevant ministries. A mid-term joint sector review and tracking of results and expenditures of the

                                                                                                                       Page 3



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)


program held in October 2025, facilitated by the National Action Committee for Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene
(CNAEHA, Committée Nationale d’Action, d’Eau, Hygiène et Assaisinissement), showed that progress is lagging behind
due to inadequate investment.
9.    Public spending for WASH is low and budget execution rates are insufficient, leaving the sector dependent on
donor financing. An analysis of expenditure data over the 2017-2021 period reveals that domestic public expenditure
on WASH was only 0.23 percent of overall government expenditure (excluding external funds), a mere 0.02 percent of
GDP and in absolute terms only US$ 9 million on average annually, of which just 15 percent for investments. Donor-
financed expenditure is tenfold, at US$ 93 million on average annually, mostly off budget. Domestic budget execution
rates are low at around 20 percent.xiii
10. The regulatory and governance framework for the water and sanitation sector in the DRC has recently
undergone significant reforms, yet important challenges remain. The establishment of the Autorité de Régulation du
Secteur de l’Eau Potable et de l’Assainissement (ARSPE) as the sector regulator in 2022 was a critical step toward
improving oversight, transparency, and accountability in service delivery.xiv However, ARSPE is not yet operational,
pending the appointment of key staff and approval of the subsidiary legal instrumentsxv. The Public Private Partnerships
(PPP) framework in DRC allows for private sector participation in water and sanitation, and sets out clear procedures
for project identification, feasibility, procurement, and contract management. PPP are managed by the Unit of Advice
and Coordination of Public-Private Partnerships (UC-PPP) under the Ministry of Planning.xvi The UC-PPP is mandated to
implement national PPP policy, promote PPPs, validate and monitor projects, and provide technical support to
contracting authorities. However, gaps remain in the operationalization of the PPP framework, including the need for
further capacity building, development of standardized tools and guidelines, and effective coordination between the
UC-PPP, ARSPE, and sector ministries. Practical implementation is still nascent, and the regulatory environment for
PPPs—particularly regarding risk allocation, fiscal commitments, and dispute resolution—requires further support to
attract and sustain private sector participation.
11. The Government is reforming key state-owned enterprises (SOEs) responsible for service delivery, including the
national water utility (Régie de Distribution d’Eau, REGIDESO). Established in 1929, REGIDESO is a public company
whose historic mission is to ensure access to drinking water for all citizens of DRC. REGIDESO was restructured into a
public limited company (Société Anonyme) on September 4, 2014, with the Congolese State as its sole shareholder. It
enjoys corporate legal status and is subjected to fiscal oversight by the Ministry of Portfolio, while its technical
operations are overseen by the Ministry of Water Resources and Electricity (MWRE). The Board of Directors and the
Managing Director are appointed by the State, with the latter most recently selected through a competitive recruitment
process. This transformation is part of a broad effort to rebuild the institutional landscape of the water sector,
consolidated in Water Law No. 15/026 of 31 December 2015.
12. Currently, REGIDESO develops and manages drinking water production and distribution in 101 urban centers
across the DRC’s 26 provinces but faces severe operational and financial challenges. Service coverage remains critically
low at just 16% nationally, with non-revenue water reaching about 40% in 2025. Chronic non-payment of government
water bills (arrears exceeding $600 million) and tariffs unchanged since 2007, undermine financial sustainability,
resulting in degraded infrastructure, high water losses, and limited capacity to expand or maintain services—especially
for vulnerable households. In response, REGIDESO’s new management has begun implementing a turnaround
performance improvement plan (PIP), under a performance contract signed with the Government in December 2023,
leveraging digitalization and innovation. Early results are promising, with revenue collection rising from approximately
CDF 270 billion in 2020 to CDF 470 billion in 2024. Sustained government commitment to the performance contract,
tariff reform, and sector governance—alongside continued investments and technical assistance (TA)—remains
essential to improve operational efficiency and financial health and secure REGIDESO’s transformation.



                                                                                                                    Page 4



                                                                                                            Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)


13. The urban sanitation sector in Kinshasa operates within a complex institutional framework involving multiple
city-level entities and faces significant challenges in service delivery, regulatory clarity, and financing. Key actors
include the RASKIN (Régie d’Assainissement de Kinshasa), which oversees urban sanitation services; FONAK (Fonds
National pour l’Assainissement de Kinshasa), responsible for mobilizing and managing financial resources for sanitation;
and the BSPE (Bureau Spécial des Projets d’Assainissement), which coordinates project implementation and technical
oversight. These institutions work under the policy guidance of the Sanitation Department (DAS) of the Ministry of
Environment and Sustainable Development (MEDD). Strengthening their capacity and coordination is essential for
improving sanitation outcomes in the city. A Citywide Inclusive Sanitation (CWIS) masterplan for Kinshasa is nearing
completion, with support from the Kin-Elenda Project (P171141). This masterplan includes the identification of required
institutional reforms and prescribes both collective (sewered) and non-collective (non-sewered) solutions to sanitation
management, including the role of local private sector actors in the sanitation and fecal sludge management (FSM) value
chain. It also incorporates complementary feasibility studies for priority investments, including a pilot Fecal Sludge
Treatment Plant (FSTP).
14. An Integrated Urban Water Management (IUWM) master plan for Kinshasa was developed in 2020, with
funding from the African Development Bank (AfDB). This plan, which covers the period 2025-2035, aims to better
manage investments in the rehabilitation and strengthening of water production and distribution facilities in the short
and medium term. The master plan includes a feasibility study, a preliminary design and tender documents for a
proposed water supply system to serve the western part of the city (Kinshasa West), including a 300,000m3/day
treatment plant. However, the plan has not been implemented due to a lack of funding and needs to be updated.
15. This project will improve water supply to key under-served areas of Kinshasa and build capacity to further
expand and better manage water supply services nationwide. The project will support the rehabilitation and expansion
of water and sanitation infrastructure in the city, building upon the success of the water component of the ongoing Kin-
Elenda Project (P171141), and the Access Governance & Reform for the Electricity and Water Sectors Project (AGREE,
P173506). The latter is financing the update of the master plan for water supply and the detailed technical studies, in
support of implementation readiness for this project. The project also complements the broader sector reform agenda
supported by the DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) (PASEA,
P178389) and AGREE (P173506) projects, by providing additional support to accelerate the utility transformation
program of REGIDESO and strengthen urban sanitation sector institutions. Additionally, the project is aligned with the
Inga3 Development Program (P506438), contributing to Pillar 2b, "Inga Growth Corridor," by extending water
infrastructure and services to rapidly growing economic hubs in Kinshasa that remain underserved, particularly in the
priority Maluku Special Economic Zone.


Relationship to CPF
 16. The project contributes to the objectives laid out in the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
 the DRC for FY22-26 (Report no. 168084-ZR). The project is aligned to Focus Area 2, objective 2.2 by supporting
 improved access to basic infrastructure services. The project focuses on reaching the underserved, especially alleviating
 the burden of lack of WASH services for women and girls. The project is aligned with the WBG 2020-2025 Fragility,
 Conflict, and Violence Strategyxvii and addresses fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) drivers, such as urbanization and
 youth employability, through urban investments to support economic transformation, mobilization of the private sector
 and the creation of new WASH sector jobs. The project also aims to build more accountable service provision through
 institutional strengthening. Hence, the project is consistent with the three cross-cutting themes: climate and
 environment, gender and governance.
17. The project is aligned with the Mobilizing Finance for Development (MFD) principles, using a one World Bank
Group (WBG) approach working in tandem with IFC and MIGA in support of the Scaling-up Water Finance initiative.xviii


                                                                                                                        Page 5



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)


A private company is interested in rehabilitating and expanding the Lukunga water treatment plant and has approached
MIGA for a guarantee. The feasibility of this transaction is being explored during preparation including the need for
viability-gap financing under the project. The project will also prepare the tender documents for other hybrid PPP for
new water treatment plants around the Maluku/Nsele (Congo-Amot) and Lutendele (Congo-Aval) areas, to be financed
at a later stage. A PPP feasibility assessment is ongoing that will validate the approach and conditions before appraisal
(including tariff estimates with REGIDESO as off-taker, VGF estimates under which a hybrid PPP could be considered,
and the need for risk mitigation instruments such as guarantees). The project is thus tagged as Private Capital
Mobilization (PCM)xix as well as Private Capital Enabling (PCE). The project is tagged as MFD-enabling as it supports
reforms, the legal and regulatory framework, and REGIDESO performance measures. The preparation will explore the
need for deploying risk insurance instruments and payment guarantees through MIGA to unleash private investments.
The project will also support preparatory studies for PPPs for local manufacturing of sector equipment such as pipes,
pumps, valves etc. to facilitate import substitution and long-term sustainability of the sector.
18. The project is aligned with the WBG Strategy on Water Security, the Global Challenge Program (GCP) on Water
Security and Adaptation and the WBG Action Plan on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience 2021–2025.
Accelerating access to WASH is one of the three pillars of the GCP on Water Security and Climate Adaptation. On
mitigation, the project will increase energy and water use efficiency in water systems for the urban areas through NRW
reduction and efficiency measures. On adaptation, the project will address vulnerabilities through (a) developing
climate-resilient infrastructure by enhancing designs and protecting water supply and sanitation (WSS) infrastructure
from flooding, droughts and landslides.
19. The project is aligned with the WBG’s Gender Strategy 2024–2030.xx The project will improve health and
education outcomes and address security and gender-based violence (GBV) risks for women and girls through at-home
and/or closer-to home water supply access and education on menstrual hygiene management. It will narrow gender
gaps by reducing women’s physical and time burden of collecting water and by creating economic opportunities through
professional development programs.


C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
To increase access to climate-resilient water supply and sanitation services in Kinshasa and to strengthen institutional
capacity for water service delivery.

Key Results (From PCN)
1.   The Project aims to achieve the following results:
• PDO Indicator 1: Number of people with access to water supply services. Disaggregated by gender, youth, and level
  of service (percentage basic and safely managed) (baseline: 0; target: 3.5 million)
• PDO Indicator 2: Number of people with access to sanitation services. Disaggregated by gender, youth, and level of
  service (percentage basic and safely managed) (baseline: 0; target: 100,000)
• PDO Indicator 3: number of schools and health centers (HC) with WASH facilities. Disaggregated by schools, and HC
  (baseline: 0; target: 100)
• PDO Indicator 5: Reduction in Non-Revenue Water Ratio of REGIDESO in Kinshasa compared to the baseline
  (percentage); Baseline: 0; Target: 10%xxi
• PDO Indicator 4: Number of beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks, disaggregated by gender, youth,
  of which people benefiting from climate-resilient infrastructure (baseline: 0; target: 3.5 million)




                                                                                                                     Page 6



                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)


D. Concept Description

20. The project constitutes Phase V under the Accelerating Access to WASH in the Eastern and Southern Africa
Region Multiphase Programmatic Approach (P512763), which was approved on September 30, 2025. The project will
directly contribute to the access and reform objectives and results of the MPA by improving access to safely managed
drinking water services in Kinshasa, through new access to previously unserved populations and through improving the
quality of existing services for safe and reliable water access at home. The project will also improve WASH access in
selected schools and health centers and increase access to sanitation services in the city. DRC will benefit extensively
from Phase I of the regional MPA (P506439), implemented by AUDA-NEPAD. AUDA-NEPAD will engage global and
regional knowledge partners to deliver TA, analytics, and peer-to-peer exchanges for utility transformation and
regulator capacity building supported by a learning agenda tailored to the local context.
21. The project will lay the foundations for phased investments, including attracting private capital and financing
from development partners towards continuously increasing WASH access in Kinshasa. The initial scope of the project
fits within the IDA $200 million allocation and limits investments to rehabilitation and expansion of the Ndjili water
treatment plant (~$60M), construction of a new intake on the Congo River (~$100M), and densification of the related
distribution network (~$30M). With these investments, it is estimated that the project will provide safely managed
water supply to 2,000,000 people (of which 500,000 will be new beneficiaries, and 1.5 million will see improvement
from basic to safely managed water access). Provided that co-financing would be mobilized, another 1.5 million people
would gain access to safely managed water supply. This scenario assumes co-financing of US$200 million from other
Development Partnersxxii and PCM for a hybrid PPP for bulk water production of up to US$100 million, bringing the total
project cost to US$ 500 million. Table 2, Annex 1 outlines project scope and impact scenarios contingent on funding
availability. The following component description assumes that co-financing and private capital mobilization are secured
(Scenario 4).
22. Component 1: National WASH Program, Governance Reforms, and Operator Performance Improvement (US$45
million IDA). This component finances technical assistance, training and equipment for driving governance and
institutional reforms [aligned to Pillars 1, 2 and 3 of the MPA respectively].
23. Sub-component 1.1 – National WASH Program, Governance and Reforms (US$5 million IDA): This component
finances technical assistance, training and equipment for (i) Preparation of medium-term investment plans (2035-2050)
for major cities in the DRC, (ii) Support for the creation of a national WASH account, (iii) Feasibility studies, preliminary
design studies, detailed design studies, and tender documents for scaling up of future climate-resilient WSS investments
in Kinshasa, (iv) skills development programs for water service professionals including on climate action (in coordination
with national institutes), (v) institutional support and capacity development of key departments and units within the
city of Kinshasa administration (RASKIN, FONAK, BSPE), (vi) transaction advisory services for the hybrid PPP for bulk
water production and for mobilizing guarantees (MIGA), (vii) technical assistance for the rationalization of water
consumption by the state institutions, (viii) financing strategy for climate-resilient sanitation, (ix) preparatory studies
for PPPs for local manufacturing of select sector equipment such as pipes, pumps, valves, meters, (x) knowledge
exchange visits to countries with experience on private capital mobilization for climate-resilient water service delivery,
and participation in international trainings and forums, including activities of the AFE WASH Access MPA.
24. Sub-component 1.2 – REGIDESO Performance Improvement (US$40 million IDA): This component finances
technical assistance, training and equipment to support the implementation of REGIDESO's Performance Improvement
Action Plan including improving their creditworthiness, digitalization efforts for reducing NRW and other efficiency
improvements, thus reducing water losses and Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. This specifically includes: (i) capacity
development and professional development of REGIDESO staff, including delivery of courses on digitalization, water
quality and NRW, (ii) improved customer engagement and female employment in technical and management positions,


                                                                                                                        Page 7



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)


(iii) measures to reduce NRW, implementation of digital applications and automatic control systems (SCADA), and
improved water quality management systems, increasing energy efficiency and boosting climate resilience, (iv)
development of a Performance-Based Contract (PBC) for NRW reduction in a pilot zone of the distribution network, and
(v) a social connections program for 120,000 households including a communications campaign.
25. Component 2: Increasing Access to Climate-Resilient Water Supply and Sanitation (US$430 million total; US$130
million IDA, US$200 million co-financing, and US$100 million in Private Capital Mobilization) [aligned to Pillar 4 of the
MPA]. It includes two subcomponents:
26. Subcomponent 2.1 Supporting Climate-Resilient Water Supply Access (US$415 million; US$115 million IDA,
US$200 million co-financing, US$100 million PCM). This subcomponent finances infrastructure investments in climate-
resilient water supply production and distribution systems in Kinshasa thereby reducing vulnerability to droughts and
boosting resilience to flood-linked damage and contamination that causes negative public health outcomes. It includes
(i) rehabilitation and expansion of the Ndjili water treatment plant, construction of a new intake on the Congo River to
replace the current flood-prone intake on the River Ndjili, and intensification of the related distribution network
including transmission lines, reservoirs and primary and tertiary distribution mains, (ii) viability gap financing (VGF) for
the construction through PPP of a new climate-proofed water treatment plant in Maluku (Congo Amont), and
rehabilitation and expansion of the existing Lukunga water treatment plant including construction of a new flood and
sediment proof water intake. The aim is to leverage public funds (IDA and other concessional co-financing), to mobilize
private financing from IFC and other lenders under a proposed hybrid PPP for the design, construction, operation and
transfer of these facilities (DBOT). The hybrid PPP with a VGF-grant aims to ensure an acceptable tariff for REGIDESO as
off-taker and a tariff structure affordable to different consumer groups. (iii) preparation and implementation of
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAP), (iv) supervision costs, and
(v) resettlement costs associated with the water systems.
27. Subcomponent 2.2 – Sanitation and WASH access in institutions (US$15 million IDA). This subcomponent
finances TA, works, training, and equipment for (i) climate-proofed WASH facilities in schools and health centers and
education activities on menstrual hygiene management for girls (ii) Construction of a sludge treatment plant (FSTP) at
the University of Kinshasa to reduce GHG emissions (iii) Construction of latrines at Camp Kabila to reduce GHG emissions,
(iv) Formalization and professionalization of sanitation private sector operators for increased sustainability, (v) technical
studies for additional wastewater/fecal sludge treatment plants that could further reduce GHG emissions and protect
water sources, (vi) sanitation communication campaigns to boost positive public health outcomes.
28. Component 3: Project Coordination and Management (US$25 million IDA). This component finances operating
costs; training; TA, equipment and vehicles for project coordination, management, communication, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation (M&E), including baseline and end line surveys, and coordination costs related to the AFE
WASH MPA for the proposed Project Implementation Unit (PIU) – the Cellule d’Exécution des Projets – Eau (CEP-O) and
the technical support unit at REGIDESO respectively.
29. Citizen Engagement, Social Inclusion and Gender: The project will integrate citizen engagement and social
inclusion interventions to enhance voice and participation, including e.g. strengthening customer feedback for
REGIDESO water services and a household connection program to remove barriers for those without services. In line
with the WASH MPA framework on gender, the project will close gender gaps in the burden for water collection and
enhances girls’ school attendance through inclusion of WASH facilities and menstrual hygiene education programs in
schools.
30. Climate Co-Benefits: The project increases access to WSS services essential for climate adaptation. It focuses on
reducing water losses, climate-proofing WSS infrastructure in the face of increasing floods and severe erosion.
Subcomponent 2.1 finances expansion and improvement of the water production and supply systems for Kinshasa,


                                                                                                                        Page 8



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)


  which will improve the flood resilience of the water supply systemsxxiii. Subcomponents 1.1 strengthens institutional
  capacities for climate resilient WASH investment planning and an enhanced regulatory environment, while
  subcomponent 1.2 will contribute to mitigation by supporting REGIDESO in reduction of NRW and energy efficiency
  measures.
  31. Paris Alignment: The proposed project is considered aligned with the Paris Agreement on both climate mitigation
  and adaptation. It is consistent with the country’s nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and the National
  Adaptation Plan 2022-2026. Developing resilient WSS services is among the priority adaptation actions in the revised
  NDC 2021.xxiv The project directly supports climate adaptation through expansion of resilient water supply for Kinshasa,
  and enhanced capacity of operators to manage and maintain systems in the face of climate risks. Regarding climate
  mitigation, project investments are on the Universally Aligned list and do not present risks of having a negative impact
  on DRC’s GHG-emissions -reduction development pathway. The project has been screened for climate change and
  disaster impacts, and specific resilience-building measures will be identified and considered in the project documents
  prior to appraisal.xxv No specific risks regarding the mitigation and adaptation aspects of the Paris Alignment assessment
  are reported at this stage.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



Environment and Social risks are Substantial.
  32. The overall risk is based on the project’s anticipated environmental and social risks and impacts, mainly activities
  on infrastructure investments in urban water supply production and distribution systems, including bulk water
  treatment plants. While many project activities are expected to be site-specific and of limited spatial extent, with
  generally predictable, temporary, and reversible adverse impacts, the overall E&S risk is elevated due to operational
  complexity, broad geographic coverage, and significant potential for localized environmental and social risks and
  impacts during both construction and operation phases. Key environmental risks include disruption from trench
  excavation, occupational and community health and safety hazards, fire and explosion risks, waste generation (including
  hazardous and fecal sludge waste), chemical management challenges, pollution, disturbance of aquatic habitats, and
  inadequate wastewater management. Key social risks and impacts include potential land acquisition and displacement,
  exclusion of vulnerable groups, labor influx, community health and safety concerns, and risks of sexual exploitation and
  abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH). While mitigation measures and technical assistance are integrated into project
  design, the magnitude and complexity of these environmental and social risks and impacts warrant a substantial rating
  at this concept stage, pending further assessment and stakeholder engagement.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate


                                                                                                                        Page 9



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)


  CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Feriha Mukuve Mugisha
   Senior Water Specialist

   Patrick Goy Ndolo
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Shelley Mcmillan
   Lead Water Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
   Democratic Republic of the Congo

 Implementing Agencies
   Ministry of Water Resources and Electricity

  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
 APPROVAL


 Task Team Leader(s):                               Feriha Mukuve Mugisha, Patrick Goy Ndolo, Shelley Mcmillan

 Approved By

 Practice Manager/Manager:                          Soma Ghosh Moulik                     25-Nov-2025

 Country Director:                                  Kofi Nouve                            18-Dec-2025




i World Bank Databank 2025 Population statistics.




                                                                                                                        Page 10



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
             The World Bank
             DRC: Scaling-Up Water Supply and Sanitation Access in Kinshasa Project (P513301)



ii Natural Resources Governance Institute (NRGO) 2015. Country Strategy Note: Democratic Republic of Congo.

iii World Bank. 2025. MACRO POVERTY OUTLOOK: Country-by-country Analysis and Projections for the Developing World
iv World Bank. 2017. Productive and Inclusive Cities for an emerging DRC
v World Bank. 2024. “Macro Poverty Outlook: Democratic Republic of Congo.” Washington, DC: World Bank. Available at:

https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/macro-poverty-outlook/mpo_cod
vi 2030 population projection using 5.1 percent growth rate from a population of 17 million in 2021.
vii University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative, Country Rankings, Scores for 2022.
viii World Bank Group. 2023. Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) Country Climate and Development Report. CCDR Series. © World Bank Group.
ix https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/congo-democratic-republic-of-the/#geography.
x WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (JMP). 2025. “Progress on household drinking water,

sanitation and hygiene 2000–2024: special focus on inequalities.” Geneva: WHO/UNICEF. Available at: https://washdata.org/reports/jmp-2025-
wash-households
xi Kapembo ML, Mukeba FB, Sivalingam P, Mukoko JB, Bokolo MK, Mulaji CK, Mpiana PT, Poté JW. Survey of water supply and assessment of

groundwater quality in the suburban communes of Selembao and Kimbanseke, Kinshasa in Democratic Republic of the Congo. Sustain Water
Resour Manag. 2022;8(1):3. doi: 10.1007/s40899-021-00592-y. Epub 2021 Nov 10. PMID: 34790861; PMCID: PMC8580925.
xii As of 2025, Kinshasa’s main water treatment plants and their functional capacities are: N’djili (280,000 m³/day), Ngaliema (80,000 m³/day),

Ozone 1 (70,000 m³/day), Ozone 2 (92,000 m³/day), Lukaya (36,000 m³/day), Lukunga (35,000 m³/day), Lemba Imbu (35,000 m³/day), Maluku
(2,280 m³/day), Mitendi (1,800 m³/day), and several borehole systems. The combined functional capacity is approximately 635,800 m³/day against
an installed capacity of 786,800 m³/day. With the commissioning of Ozone 3 (110,000 m³/day, expected in 2026), total capacity will rise to about
886,800 m³/day, still well below the city’s estimated demand of over 2 million m³/day.
xiii World Bank. 2023. DRC Water Sector Public Expenditure Review. Available Online:

https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/dd99b720176a81d2243053bc3986cccd-0010012024/original/DRC-WASH-Infographic-English.pdf
xiv
     Established under article 1 of Decree 22/04 of 1 March 2022 on the creation, organization and functioning of the Public Water Service Regulatory
Authority (ARSPE).
xv
    The measures d’application of the law are currently being developed, including the organigram and internal procedures.
xvi
     Governed by Law No. 18/016 of July 9, 2018, on Public-Private Partnerships, complemented by Decree No. 21/04 of October 2, 2021, creating
the UC-PPP.
xvii World Bank. 2020. World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 2020–2025.
xviii Khemka, Rochi; Lopez, Patricia; Jensen, Olivia. 2023. Scaling Up Finance for Water: A WBG Strategic Framework and Roadmap for Action. © World

Bank. http://hdl.handle.net/10986/40225
xix Mobilization of private equity, IFC debt and other development financing institutions debt
xx World Bank Group Gender Strategy 2024 – 2030: Accelerate Gender Equality to End Poverty on a Livable Planet. World Bank Group; Washington

DC.
xxi
      NRW is estimated at 38 percent in 2025; a 10 percent reduction target represents NRW of 28 percent in 2031.
xxii Co-financing from the African Development Bank and OPEC Fund for International Development is being explored.
xxiii Over 57 percent of REGIDESO’s current water production capacity is located on tributary rivers to the Congo River, which are heavily exposed to

flood risks, erosion, sedimentation and anthropogenic pollution. The transfer of the intake of the Ndjili water treatment plant from River Ndjili to the
Congo River and expansion of the plant will ensure at least 76 percent of the city’s water production is secure against these risks.
xxiv This is alongside a suite of other measures such as promoting increased carbon stocks in the land use sector, protecting riverbanks, ensuring

floodplain protection, identifying the most severely climate risk–affected areas, and building the country's capacity for climate risk management.
xxv The climate and disaster risk screening assessment has identified the project is vulnerable to floods and landslides. To mitigate these risks,

infrastructure design will be informed by hazard risk maps. Infrastructure investments will ensure protecting sites from future risks, incorporating
systemic and contextual risks in investment and O&M plans.




                                                                                                                                                  Page 11



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
