Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01608




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                         MID EAST,NORTH                                             Potable Water Security and
                          Tunisia                                                     P514340
                                                         AFRICA,AFG,PAK                                             Resilience Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         02-Feb-2026                  31-Mar-2026                   Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          Ministry of Economy and
                                                         SONEDE
                          Planning

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)




_For Official Use Only_
                          To improve the quality and resilience of potable water services; and to strengthen the operational performance of the
                          national water utility

                          Components
                          1- Operational performance and governance of the national water utility
                          2 - Reliability and resilience of water supply services
                          3 - Project management

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                           256.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                                256.00
                                       of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               215.00
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00

                          DETAILS

                                                                                                                                              Page 1
                                 The World Bank
                                 Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)



                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                  215.00
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                               Counterpart Funding                                                                                            41.00
                                 National Government                                                                                          41.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial


                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




_For Official Use Only_
                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context

                          1.        Tunisia is a lower middle-income country with a diverse economy driven by a large service sector but
                          experiencing moderate growth, fiscal challenges, regional disparities and high unemployment. Tunisia’s economy
                          stagnated in 2023, due to limited demand, drought, pressure on external financing conditions, and regulatory constraints;
                          but it slightly recovered in 2024 (1.6 percent growth); and then picked up in the first nine months of 2025 (2.4 percent
                          growth), driven by a recovery in the agricultural sector and increased construction activity. Assuming drought conditions
                          ease, it is expected that moderate growth will occur over 2026–27 but remains at substantial risk. Transfers to State-
                          Owned Enterprises (SOEs), together with public sector employment, social protection programs and other public
                          expenditures, contributed to a rising debt burden from 40 percent (2010) to 80 percent (2023) of GDP. The debt of the 50
                          largest SOEs constitutes 38 percent of the GDP (2020). Inequality has recently increased for the first time in decades: the
                          Gini Index rose from 32.8 (2015) to 33.7 (2021). Disparities persist between lagged interior regions and developed coastal
                          regions. Women's labor force participation in Tunisia is less than half that of men (26 percent versus 69 percent). Graduate
                          unemployment is 31 percent, reflecting persistent challenges in youth inclusion.

                          2.       Government’s priorities for the next five years are being formalized through the 2026-2030 National
                          Development Plan under preparation Enhancing human capital remains critical, with a focus on employability. Other
                          priorities include addressing water scarcity, advancing the energy transition, expanding digitalization, improving the
                          business environment, and supporting private sector development.

                          3.     The Tunisian economy is highly vulnerable to water scarcity, which is increasingly exacerbated by climate
                          change. Most climate change projections predict higher temperatures (1.9-2.9°C increase this century) and lower

                                                                                                                                                  Page 2
                                 The World Bank
                                 Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)


                          precipitation (10-35 percent decrease) for the Mediterranean region, including Tunisia. The agricultural sector would be
                          particularly affected by climate inaction, with its value added expected to fall by 29 percent by 2050 (compared to 7 and
                          3 percent for industry and services, respectively), with dire implications for food security and rural jobs.

                           Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          4.       Tunisia successfully developed its water supply to the benefit of its population and economy, but the traditional
                          supply-oriented approach is increasingly constrained with respect to conventional water resources. The 1970s and
                          1980s marked the peak in the construction of large hydraulic infrastructure: dams were built in the water endowed
                          northwest, as well as significant inter-basin transfers linking these dams to the drier areas in the northeast (Tunis and Cap
                          Bon) and the center (Sfax). The country achieved near universal access to drinking water, and the provision of some form
                          of sanitation for 97 percent of the population. Irrigated agriculture – covering 10 percent of the agricultural land –
                          generates 36 percent of the agriculture value added. Surface water is mobilized to almost full capacity (92 percent), leaving
                          little opportunity for further supply-side augmentation through construction of new dams. Groundwater is overexploited
                          (133 percent), contributing to saltwater intrusion and increased abstraction costs. To increase its water availability, Tunisia
                          has been investing in non-conventional sources, although their contribution to the water balance didn’t reach yet that of
                          other North African countries: at present desalination and reuse of treated wastewater (TWW) contribute 2 percent and
                          1 percent, respectively, to the total water supply of Tunisia.




_For Official Use Only_
                          5.        Tunisia’s growing water gap is a major challenge for the country's socio-economic development: without action
                          to address water insecurity, a quarter of the country’s water demand could go unmet by 2050. Tunisia is extremely
                          water-scarce: per capita water availability in 2021 was 395 m3, below the conventional definition of the absolute water
                          scarcity threshold of 500 m3. With rapidly depleting resource endowment and sustained growth of demand across all
                          sectors, service interruptions are common, particularly in the more water-stressed Central and Southern regions. Tunisia
                          urgently needs implementation of both demand side and supply side management actions to close the gap, and to manage
                          the mismatch between supply and demand in a coherent and structural manner, rather than on a reactive emergency
                          basis. Currently, when water supply is insufficient, water from the dams is prioritized for human and industrial demands,
                          while restrictions are imposed on public irrigation schemes with far-reaching consequences for agricultural production.
                          Inter-basin transfers are key to managing the imbalance, but they are also expensive to construct and operate. The
                          exceptionally limited water supply of 2024 caused the energy costs of the Northern Water Canal and Pipeline Exploitation
                          Company (Société d’Exploitation des Canaux et Conduites d’Eau du Nord, SECADENORD) to double. Despite the
                          prioritization of potable water supply needs and severe restrictions applied to public irrigation schemes, the national water
                          utility (Société Nationale d’Exploitation et de Distribution des Eaux, SONEDE) does not receive sufficient freshwater to
                          meet domestic water needs. In response, SONEDE has started developing seawater desalination capacity (exploring
                          opportunities to do so through public-private partnerships, PPP), while gearing up efforts to reduce physical water losses
                          and to reduce per capita consumption (currently at 128 liters per day).

                          6.      Climate change further threatens Tunisia’s water endowment. Tunisia is among the countries most vulnerable
                          to climate change in Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan and Pakistan (MENAAP) region. Since 2015, the country has
                          been grappling with a multiyear drought, which has resulted in dam filling levels significantly below historical averages
                          and in reduced recharge of aquifers. Temperature increases lead to increases in water demand and evapotranspiration,
                          which intensifies water needs for agriculture. With decreasing availability of surface water sources, compounded by rising
                          temperatures, water users shift increasingly towards groundwater, adding to the pressure on already overexploited
                          groundwater resources. In addition, reduced water availability has adversely affected water quality, complicating efforts
                          to maintain safe and reliable supply standards for both urban consumption and agricultural use. Across multiple climate
                          change scenarios, it is projected that by 2050, increases in temperature and in the frequency of dry years, coupled with

                                                                                                                                                    Page 3
                                 The World Bank
                                 Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)


                          changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events (including both floods and droughts), will further
                          decrease water availability. Moreover, climate change is leading to sea level rise in coastal Tunisia, which exacerbates
                          saltwater intrusion into aquifers, and higher temperatures could exacerbate wildfire risk.

                          7.       Demand for water has been substantially increasing. Tunisia’s population has increased threefold since 1950,
                          and has progressively moved to the cities, today, only one out of three Tunisian lives in rural areas. Irrigated areas tripled
                          since the early 1970s, thanks to the construction of large dams in the northwest (where most of the public irrigation
                          schemes are located) as well as increasing groundwater exploitation. Consequently, annual freshwater withdrawals have
                          increased from 1.1 billion m3 (1975) to 3.9 billion m3 (2021). Increasing water consumption generates greater volumes of
                          wastewater, intensifying the demand for the management of water quality, adequate sanitation and treatment
                          infrastructures: TWW volume increased from 5 million m3 in 1975 to 287 million m3 in 2020. These dynamics highlight the
                          necessity of IWRM to safeguard livelihoods, public health, and environmental sustainability.

                          8.        Tunisia’s water management challenges are not only about scarcity but also about efficiency and governance.
                          About 23 percent of drinking water and 30 percent of irrigation water in public schemes do not reach consumers due to
                          leakages, undermining both the efficient use of scarce resources and the revenues of the operators. In southern Tunisia,
                          lower services are more pronounced, with the quality of supplied water often exceeding the recommended maximum
                          salinity levels due to limitations in treatment capacity of brackish water sources. In the country's Southern region, only 7




_For Official Use Only_
                          percent of the population is satisfied with the quality of potable water supplied. While substantial investments have been
                          made in efficient on farm irrigation, rationalizing agricultural water consumption has been constrained by the limited
                          rollout of complementary governance measures (quotas, volumetric pricing, and incentives). Across all sub-sectors, the
                          cost of water in Tunisia does not fully reflect the scarcity of this resource.

                          9.       The sector’s performance is challenged by aging infrastructure, suboptimal maintenance, and insufficient
                          human resources. For SONEDE, non-revenue water (NRW) is now twice the level of two decades ago. ONAS's performance
                          is increasingly constrained by aging infrastructure, with many wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) operating beyond
                          capacity and requiring rehabilitation. Public irrigation schemes face ongoing challenges related to achieving higher value
                          addition, which in turn impacts cost recovery, maintenance levels, and service reliability, resulting in operational
                          disruptions. Staffing efficiency in SONEDE is high by international standards, with about two staff per 1,000 connections,
                          but this may likely reflect restrictions of labor legislation and a hiring freeze rather than operational efficiency. SONEDE’s
                          efficiency is constrained by the centralization of its operational functions and complex internal processes to execute
                          routine operational activities. Human resources are often strained, such the operation of desalination plants, for which
                          the local market of experienced specialists is thin. In ONAS, limited financial resources, as well as institutional and human
                          capacity undermine ONAS's ability to properly staff, monitor, and upgrade facilities. ONAS’ dire financial position is at the
                          heart of the hiring freeze that has been in place since 2008, with consequent adverse impact on expertise in the sub-
                          sector. These factors combined result in service gaps and environmental risks. The CRDAs are equally understaffed and
                          underfunded.

                          10.      Water management practices in Tunisia struggle to optimize economic returns, particularly within the
                          agricultural sector. About 8 percent of cultivated land is irrigated, contributing up to 35 percent of agricultural production
                          and 25 percent of agricultural exports. Yet, Tunisia records lower agricultural water productivity at the regional level.
                          Despite the proven benefits of climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices, uptake among smallholder farmers remains
                          limited, due to limited access to finance and extension services, limited availability and high cost of certified seeds, and
                          low awareness of innovative techniques. Despite successive plans and strategies prioritizing value chain development,
                          returns remain suboptimal: citrus fruits are still mostly exported in bulk, and 75 percent of tomato production is used as
                          low value input in the industry of concentrated tomato paste instead of exported as fresh tomatoes. This is largely related

                                                                                                                                                   Page 4
                                 The World Bank
                                 Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)


                          to fragmented production systems, limited modalities to promote aggregation and limited farmer organizations unable to
                          effectively manage storage, processing and commercialization of their members’ production.

                          11.      The Tunisian water sector consists of a multiplicity of institutions that contribute to insufficient interministerial
                          coordination and suboptimal responses to water scarcity. The Ministry of Agriculture, Hydraulic Resources, and Fisheries
                          (Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Hydrauliques et de la Pêche, MARHP) oversees urban potable water through
                          the SONEDE; rural potable water and irrigated agriculture through its regional offices (Commissariats Régionaux de
                          Développement Agricole, CRDAs); as well as cross-cutting aspects of water resources management through its planning
                          department (Bureau de la Planification et des Equilibres Hydrauliques, BPEH), its hydraulic department (Direction Generale
                          des Barrages et des Grands Travaux Hydrauliques), and its water resources department including groundwater (Direction
                          Generale des Ressources en Eau, DGRE). The State Secretary for water resources reports to the MARHP Minister. The
                          Ministry of Environment oversees urban sanitation through the ONAS including all aspects of water quality management
                          including environmental and discharge regulations. Local groups (Groupement de Developpement Agricole, GDA) play a
                          role in rural areas for both water supply and last mile irrigation service delivery. Water sector institutions suffer from
                          delays in decision-making and are hindered by complex administrative procedures. In the case of TWW reuse, a multi-
                          sectoral steering committee was established under the leadership of MARHP. Coordination between ONAS, the Ministry
                          of Environment, Ministry of Health and MARHP remains limited, with improvement needed to better align investment
                          priorities for wastewater treatment and reuse.




_For Official Use Only_
                          12.      Modernizing the water sector’s legislative framework is key to more effectively addressing the growing water
                          gap. Efforts to modernize the institutional and legal framework in the water sector have not yet delivered significant
                          results. Tunisia’s Water Code dates to 1975, when the country was not suffering from water deficits. The revision of the
                          Water Code has been under discussion since 2009, but changes in key political positions and limited technical consensus
                          have been significantly delaying its approval. The IWRM agenda would benefit from improved leadership, and utilities are
                          being pressured to assume new roles (e.g., SONEDE as producer of desalinated water, ONAS as producer of TWW) that
                          are not aligned with their original mandates, competencies and/or financial structures, for which they have insufficient
                          human and financial resources. Attempts at introducing reforms to improve management of public irrigation schemes
                          illustrate the challenges of advancing complex institutional changes that involve multiple stakeholders and policy makers.
                          For TWW reuse, which has been identified as a priority, efforts to strengthen regulatory and institutional framework are
                          also challenged by the complexity of coordinating policies across multiple departments.

                          13.      Water utilities and public operators in Tunisia face increasingly strained budgets; despite this, their overall
                          financial positions remain relative resilient. The government’s approach to SOE governance challenges is to address
                          reform measures by sector with tailored interventions adapted to each public utility. For the water sector operators,
                          proposed measures include improving operational efficiency (e.g reduction in NRW), financial sustainability, addressing
                          institutional bottlenecks, and increasing private sector participation. Except for SONEDE, subsidies are needed to
                          compensate for the shortfall in revenues collected from customers, which are insufficient to cover Operation and
                          Maintenance (O&M) costs, let alone the capital investments for the renewal and expansion of infrastructure. Yet these
                          subsidies are not sufficient to help address pressure on service quality, aging infrastructure, and limited technical and
                          commercial performance. At the same time, utilities have limited power to increase their revenues, as pricing decisions
                          are taken at higher policy levels and shaped by social considerations. The challenge of financial sustainability in the sector
                          is further impacted by inflation.

                          14.    The Plan Eau 2050 (Water 2050 Plan) aims to close the water demand-supply gap by 2050. The Plan, which was
                          presented to the Higher Water Council in 2023, serves as a cornerstone for the country’s economic growth, human
                          development, and environmental sustainability. Presented to the Higher Water Council in 2023, the Plan Eau 2050


                                                                                                                                                   Page 5
                                 The World Bank
                                 Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)


                          advocates for infrastructure development, institutional and governance improvements, legal reforms, and enhanced
                          interministerial coordination. Prioritization still needs to be sharpened, and several proposals have yet to gain broad
                          institutional ownership. The Plan aims to increase contribution of non-conventional water supply, increasing contribution
                          of TWW reuse to the water balance by 20 times, and of desalination by four times by 2050. In the face of its ambitious
                          targets, the Plan estimates a total financing need of US$23 billion, or US$900 million per year. This is well beyond the
                          financing capacity of the state budget, as it corresponds to 60 percent of total public annual investments.

                          15.      The RESEau Program aims to support the Government of Tunisia in the coordinated implementation of
                          investments, performance improvements and reforms needed to shift the country towards greater water security and
                          resilience. The Program adopts a holistic approach, focusing on key productive uses such as potable water, sanitation and
                          irrigation services coupled with broader water resources management interventions. Program interventions aim at making
                          services more resilient in the face of climate change; tackling both demand management and supply increase and
                          diversification; and spanning across conventional (surface and groundwater) and non-conventional (desalination and
                          TWW reuse) water sources. The RESEau Program complements ongoing efforts supported by the Bank through the
                          Integrated Disaster Resilience Program for Results (P173568) and by sector partners in improving water resources
                          management through improved monitoring, planning (systems modeling and decision-making tools and development of
                          early warning systems as well as development of water management strategies (e.g to improve groundwater
                          management). The programmatic approach recognizes the interconnected challenges across sub-sectors and the need for
                          a holistic approach to achieve impact and sustainability at scale. As part of the Program conceptualization process, the




_For Official Use Only_
                          World Bank (WB) prepared a Water sector note building on the Plan Eau 2050, which was socialized with several
                          concerned Ministries (Ministry of Economy and Planning, MEP; Ministry of Finance, MF; MARHP; Ministry of Environment)
                          and utilities (SONEDE, ONAS) in December 2024. The note identified key performance improvement actions and reforms
                          that are needed to accompany infrastructure development over the next ten years to ensure that the RESEau Program
                          achieves its anticipated benefits in a sustainable way.



                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                          16.    To improve the quality and resilience of potable water services; and to strengthen the operational performance
                          of the national urban water utility

                            Key Results
                          17. The proposed PDO indicators are:
                                • People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (#) (corporate scorecard indicator);
                                • People provided with safely managed water (#) (corporate scorecard indicator);
                                • Reduction in non-revenue water (m3/yr).

                          18.      The proposed project includes three components, for a total project cost of US$256 million. The IBRD loan will
                          total US$215 million, financing all the activities proposed net of taxes. The government contribution is estimated at US$41
                          million, covering all project related taxes and fees. SONEDE will also contribute in kind to the project cost in the form of
                          salaries for employees assigned to the project.

                            D. Project Description


                                                                                                                                                  Page 6
                                    The World Bank
                                    Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)


                          Component 1. Operational performance and governance improvement of the national water utility (US$97 million, in
                          addition to US$21 million government contribution)

                          Subcomponent 1.1. Technical performance improvement program (US$78 million, in addition to US$17 million government
                          contribution)

                          19.     This subcomponent will support the improvement of the technical performance of SONEDE, with a focus on
                          Sfax (Tunisia's second largest city), Tozeur and Kebili representing 1.2 million people supplied. Activities under this
                          subcomponent will reduce the level of non-revenue water (NRW), currently at 31 percent of the water distributed in the
                          three governorates, thus reducing energy needs and GHG emissions per volume supplied from the system. The water
                          saved from loss reduction will contribute to improving water availability (adaptation) and resilience to droughts, meeting
                          the growing demand of the population, and in particular offering continuous water supply services to 60,000 people in
                          the South of Sfax Governorate currently experiencing intermittent water supply during peak water demand months, and
                          reducing SONEDE’s operational costs. The saved water will also reduce the need for desalination for the equivalent volume
                          of water of about 8.8 Mm3/yr, equivalent to a 100% reduction of GHG emissions (baseline 229,316 tCO2e; project 0 tCO2e).

                          20.     Strengthening of SONEDE’s technical performance in Sfax, Tozeur and Kebili will include1:
                          • Restructuring of the water distribution networks in 160 district metered areas (DMAs) that will be fitted with flow




_For Official Use Only_
                              meters, pressure reduction valves, and sensors communicating data to a supervisory center (US$8 million) and that
                              can increase efficiency and reduce energy use. This involves updating the network hydraulic model.
                          • Updating a Geographic Information System (GIS), collecting and analyzing flow, pressure data, and incidents with the
                              implementation of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition equipment (SCADA – hardware, software, and
                              communication infrastructure) to allow for supervising the network’s real-time functioning (US$4 million) contributing
                              to reduced emissions and reduced energy use.
                          • Rehabilitating and/or replacing part of the water distribution network and house connections (US$60 million) for
                              adapting to water scarcity and droughts.
                          • Provisioning of leak detection equipment (US$1 million) to reduce NRW and thus energy use.
                          • Technical assistance to train and assist SONEDE in the identification and reduction of physical water losses through
                              combinations of analytical and onsite investigative methods. The technical assistance will also support SONEDE with
                              the design, implementation and supervision of activities of this component and train utility personnel (US$5 million).

                          Subcomponent 1.2. Commercial performance improvement program (US$11 million, in addition to US$2 million
                          government contribution)

                          21.      Activities focusing on strengthening SONEDE’s commercial performance will include the implementation in Sfax
                          of Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) to enhance commercial performance in monitoring, measuring, billing, and
                          collecting accurate water usage data leading to reduced apparent water losses (US$10 million). The project will fund the
                          supply and installation of 100,000 electronic smart meters equipped with data communication capabilities, the
                          implementation of data transmission systems, and the provision of meter data management applications. Given SONEDE’s
                          limited experience with AMI, the first batch of 100,000 meters will provide insights for a future scale-up to all clients in
                          Sfax and nationwide.


                          1
                              All of which contribute holistically to the target NRW reduction.

                                                                                                                                                  Page 7
                                 The World Bank
                                 Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)


                          Subcomponent 1.3. Internal governance reform and customer management (US$8 million, in addition to US$2 million
                          government contribution)

                          22.      This subcomponent will support SONEDE’s organizational reform for enhanced internal governance, customer
                          orientation and efficiency (US$6 million). SONEDE has been actively engaged in a transformative process for several years
                          with the objective of enhancing its operational efficiency. One of SONEDE’s current priorities is to transfer most of its
                          operational functions to regional units. This initiative aims to streamline bureaucratic processes and improve SONEDE’s
                          responsiveness to the specific needs of local communities in terms of investments, operations, maintenance, and service
                          delivery. This reform towards greater decentralization must be meticulously designed, considering the national
                          regulations and laws, the financial stability of the company, and the quality of service provided to its customers.
                          Specialized experts will be engaged to assist SONEDE in designing the blueprint for this transformation, and will provide
                          technical assistance and other forms of support to SONEDE for the implementation of this plan. The subcomponent will
                          also finance the preparation and implementation of priority measures of a plan to promote gender equity within the
                          institution.

                          23.      The subcomponent will also support the modernization of customer relationships and digitalization strategy
                          (US1 million) through the design and rollout of a customer billing and management information technological (IT) system,
                          more seamlessly integrated with SONEDE’s financial procedures. It will encompass all business processes, including




_For Official Use Only_
                          enterprise resources planning, customer resources management, asset management, and more. To avoid a multiplicity of
                          systems that could strain capacity and create interoperability challenges, a more integrated approach, such as Enterprise
                          Resource Planning (EPR) or modular systems, will be explored to improve efficiency and sustainability. Opportunities to
                          link these systems to government-wide platforms will also be considered to enhance transparency and service delivery. A
                          phased rollout starting with core modules (billing and customer relationship) and supported by capacity-building will help
                          reduce implementation risk. A specialized consulting company will provide SONEDE with assistance in developing the
                          digitalization strategy and development plan.

                          24.     Finally, activities will focus on strengthening customer relationships (US$1 million) through (i) a communication
                          and advocacy strategy with stakeholders, including an institutionalized complaints and feedback system for SONEDE that
                          can also be used to manage project-related feedback; (ii) customer satisfaction surveys and (iii) improvements in billing
                          procedures, including options such as digital billing and mobile payments. The technical assistance supporting the
                          framework for its customer opinion survey will also support SONEDE to expand customer “management” to customer
                          “care” to explore potential policies such as include bill discounts, flexible payment terms, temporary financial assistance,
                          water efficiency upgrades, and educational resources on water conservation and how to use water more efficiently to
                          lower bills.

                          Component 2. Reliability and resilience of water supply services (US$116 million, in addition to US$25 million
                          government contribution)

                          25.     This component will aim to improve the quality and drought resilience of water supply services in the water-
                          scarce governorates of southern Tunisia, where service delivery indicators lag behind those of urban centers in the North
                          and in the Center of the country. In the governorates of Gabès, Médenine and Tataouine, representing 1.1 million people
                          supplied through the interconnected network of south-eastern Tunisia, the project will strengthen and secure the
                          production of drought-resilient drinking water from a non-conventional water source, potentially partially replacing
                          overexploited groundwater resources and improving service reliability and drinking water quality. These investments will
                          help reduce the water supply deficit in these areas, reduce drought vulnerability, restore service continuity and reduce


                                                                                                                                                  Page 8
                                 The World Bank
                                 Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)


                          the salinity of supplied water. The component will include the provision of support to SONEDE for studies and works
                          supervision.

                          Subcomponent 2.1. Expansion of the Zarat Seawater Desalination Plant (US$70 million, in addition to US$21 million
                          government contribution)

                          26.      This subcomponent will finance the expansion of a desalination plant in Zarat, increasing its production capacity
                          from 50,000 to 100,000 m3 per day, and the O&M of the entire plant during the semi-industrial running phase for a
                          year, and potentially during the construction period. The water supply to the southeastern region of Tunisia
                          (governorates of Gabès, Médenine, and Tataouine) originates from brackish water desalination plants situated in Gabès,
                          Zarzis, Jerba and Ben Guerdane, boreholes, and a seawater desalination plant in Jerba and Zarat (commissioned in July
                          2024). Without any increase in desalination capacity, the inhabitants would face a climate-change-exacerbated water
                          deficit from about 9% to 18% by 2040 during peak demand months, aggravating service interruptions and water quality
                          (already exceeding national salinity targets for 70 percent of the region’s customers). Also, energy use for freshwater
                          abstraction would increase significantly due to the significant lowering of the ground water table by about one meter
                          annually due to shortages and over-abstraction (depletion risk), while some beneficiaries may resort to household-level
                          water supply alternatives that would often be energy intensive but ineffective. Expanding the Zarat desalination plant
                          with an additional capacity of 50,000m3 per day is essential for south-eastern region of Tunisia given its high drought




_For Official Use Only_
                          vulnerability and to increase climate adaptation and resilience of water supply.

                          27.     The Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) contract for the Zarat desalination plant, covering a first
                          phase of 50,000 m3 per day, was awarded at the end of 2018. The plant was inaugurated in 2024 and has been operated
                          for one year by the contractor. The plant, using reverse osmosis technology, was designed to accommodate an extension
                          of the same capacity. Most civil infrastructure (seawater intake, buildings, pipeline for brine disposal, etc.) has already
                          been constructed for the final capacity, which will reduce the costs of the expansion. The expansion of the plant to its final
                          capacity of 100,000 m3 per day will encompass in particular the installation of seawater pumps, pre-treatment layer filters,
                          reverse osmosis units with energy recovery devices, treated water pumps and electrical transformers. The construction
                          period is estimated at 18 months. The subcomponent will also fund engineering studies and technical assistance for works
                          supervision.

                          Subcomponent 2.2. Strengthening of treated water transmission systems from the Zarat desalination plant (US$46 million,
                          in addition to US$10 million government contribution)

                          28.      This subcomponent will finance the strengthening of large diameter water transmission infrastructure from the
                          desalination plant to the distribution centers of Gabès, Médenine, Tataouine and Ben Guerdane, and associated
                          engineering studies and technical assistance for works supervision. The plant will generate an additional volume of water
                          that will be transported via two primary pipelines and associated pumping stations to Gabès, Médenine and Tataouine.
                          The transmission main towards Gabès consists of 5 kilometers of pipeline of 500 mm diameter (and associated civil works)
                          for an estimated cost of US$3 million. The branch towards Médenine and Tataouine will consist of 24 kilometers of 600
                          mm diameter and a pumping station along its way for an estimated cost of US$18 million. Finally, the branch towards Ben
                          Guerdane will consist of 50 km of 500 mm diameter pipeline and a pumping station, for an estimated cost of US$25 million.
                          SONEDE has extensive experience in the design, procurement, and supervision of these types of works. When the
                          emissions from the trucking of bottled water and the energy required for sourcing are partially offset by the energy
                          requirement of the desalination expansion, GHG emissions increase by only about 10% (baseline 2,562,123 tCO2e; project
                          2,814,913 tCO2e; net 252,789 tCO2e).


                                                                                                                                                   Page 9
                                 The World Bank
                                 Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)




                          Component 3. Project Management (US$2 million, in addition to government contribution of US$0.4 million)

                          29.     This component will include: (i) project management, monitoring and evaluation activities, including technical
                          assistance to the project implementation unit; (ii) training (including on identifying and structuring public-private
                          partnerships); (iii) strengthening capacity in environmental and social safeguards management; (iv) the preparation and
                          implementation of safeguards instruments, (v) the purchase of vehicles and other equipment required for project
                          management, and (vi) the preparation of financial audits. The salaries of Project Implementation Unit (PIU) staff will be
                          paid by SONEDE.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                             Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No




_For Official Use Only_
                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




                          30.       The environmental risk rating for the Project is assessed as Substantial, reflecting the nature and scale of the
                          planned physical interventions, the sensitivity of the coastal and urban environments in which activities will take place,
                          and the current institutional capacity constraints of the implementing agency. The Project includes multiple categories of
                          physical works with distinct environmental risk profiles. These include: (i) rehabilitation and restructuring of potable water
                          distribution networks in densely populated urban and peri-urban areas; (ii) construction of long-distance adduction and
                          transmission pipelines crossing semi-arid and desert environments; and (iii) Phase 2 expansion of the Zarat seawater
                          desalination plant through the installation of additional electromechanical equipment within the footprint of an existing
                          facility. While the Project does not involve new greenfield development or works in protected areas, several components
                          present technically complex environmental risks that require careful management.

                          31.      Key environmental risks are associated with increased brine discharge volumes from the Zarat desalination plant,
                          high energy demand and associated greenhouse gas emissions, management of chemicals and hazardous materials used
                          in desalination processes, and the generation of hazardous and non-hazardous waste, including electronic waste from the
                          deployment of smart meters. The coastal location of the desalination plant introduces potential risks to the marine
                          environment, particularly related to changes in salinity and dispersion patterns in nearshore waters. Although these risks
                          are expected to be localized and manageable, they require targeted assessment and robust monitoring given the
                          ecological sensitivity of the Gulf of Gabès and existing pressures on marine ecosystems. Civil works related to network
                          rehabilitation and pipeline construction may generate temporary but significant impacts, including dust, noise, traffic
                          disruptions, spoil generation, interference with existing utilities, and community safety risks associated with open trenches
                          and heavy vehicle movements. These impacts are largely site-specific and reversible but may be challenging to manage in
                          dense urban settings and along extended linear corridors if not adequately planned and supervised.


                                                                                                                                                  Page 10
                                 The World Bank
                                 Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)


                          32.     From an institutional perspective, SONEDE currently does not have a fully operational Environmental and Social
                          Management System aligned with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework and has limited prior experience
                          implementing projects under the ESF. This represents a material risk to effective environmental and social risk
                          management during implementation. To address this, the Project integrates a set of risk-mitigation measures, including
                          the preparation of a Phase-2-specific ESMP for the Zarat desalination plant, a targeted ESIA gap review focusing on
                          material changes introduced by Phase 2, an Environmental and Social Management Framework to guide screening and
                          management of other project activities, and a phased ESMS Roadmap supported by capacity building and technical
                          assistance. Overall, while the Project presents notable environmental risks due to its technical complexity, coastal setting,
                          and scale of infrastructure works, these risks are considered manageable through proportionate assessment, well-defined
                          mitigation measures, strengthened institutional arrangements, and close supervision. With the planned environmental
                          instruments and capacity-building measures in place, the Project is expected to comply with the requirements of the
                          Environmental and Social Framework and achieve its development objectives in an environmentally sustainable manner.

                          33.      The project’s social risks are rated as substantial due to several key factors. These include significant potential
                          impacts on local communities’ livelihoods and well-being, especially considering the Implementing Agency’s limited
                          experience with World Bank social risk management and the absence of social specialists within the Project Management
                          Unit (PMU). The wide-ranging activities, such as equipping the Zarat desalination plant, constructing and rehabilitating




_For Official Use Only_
                          water supply and distribution networks, and rolling out electronic smart meters across six southern governorates, further
                          heighten the risk profile. Main social risks identified are: discrimination and social exclusion of vulnerable groups (women,
                          youth, irregular migrants, and the poor); labor and working conditions risks, including the potential for social friction,
                          unfair labor practices, and increased risks of sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment; community health and
                          safety hazards due to construction activities; potential disruption of livelihoods and small-scale land acquisition; possible
                          impacts on cultural heritage, particularly in Sfax; and the risk of ineffective community engagement and grievance
                          mechanisms because of technical and political barriers. Collectively, these factors justify the substantial social risk
                          classification for the project. The project is rated as Substantial risk for sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual
                          harassment (SEA/SH) due to its wide geographic scope, extensive construction activities, and engagement with vulnerable
                          populations across six governorates. Contributing factors include socioeconomic disparities, limited access to services, and
                          gaps in prevention measures such as codes of conduct, training, and reporting systems.

                          34.      To effectively address these substantial social risks, the project will prepare and implement several key
                          environmental and social instruments: A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be developed to ensure meaningful,
                          inclusive, and ongoing engagement with all affected communities, promoting transparency and responsiveness
                          throughout the project lifecycle; A Labor Management Procedure (LMP) will outline measures to safeguard fair and safe
                          working conditions, prevent discrimination, and manage potential labor influx. Where project activities may result in
                          involuntary resettlement or impact livelihoods; a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and/or a Resettlement and Livelihoods
                          Plan (RLP) will be prepared, as needed, to ensure that affected persons are adequately compensated and supported in
                          restoring their livelihoods; SEA/SH action plan will be prepared and annexed to the ESMF. Collectively, these instruments
                          will form the cornerstone of the project’s approach to managing social risks and ensuring positive outcomes for all
                          stakeholders. Both environmental and social risks are considered manageable with appropriate mitigation measures,
                          strong implementation support, and a clear commitment to building institutional capacity. The project offers a valuable
                          opportunity to enhance E&S practices and integrate Social Risk Management particularly through institutionalizing
                          SONEDE’s ESMS and strengthening inclusive stakeholder engagement processes in the water sector.




                                                                                                                                                  Page 11
                                 The World Bank
                                 Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)


                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          35.      SONEDE, Tunisia’s state-owned enterprise for potable water supply, will be responsible for the implementation
                          of the project. The Republic of Tunisia be the recipient of the IBRD loan, and SONEDE will be responsible for project
                          management and implementation. SONEDE is administratively attached to MARHP but operates as a corporate entity with
                          a board of directors guiding its operations. Financial arrangements between the Government and SONEDE are being
                          finalized and will be captured in a subsidiary agreement between the Government and SONEDE, to be formalized and
                          shared with the Bank before project effectiveness.

                          36.     A PIU will be established within SONEDE. The PIU will be comprised of qualified SONEDE staff with applicable
                          technical expertise and tangible experience managing externally funded infrastructure investment projects including a
                          procurement specialist, a financial management specialist, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, and one or several
                          safeguard specialists. Several departments within SONEDE will be closely involved in the implementation and operations
                          of the project including the Central Studies Division (Direction Central des Etudes) for the management of Component 2,
                          and in particular the Southern Regional Operations Division (Direction Régionale d’Exploitation Sud) for the management
                          of Component 1. The PIU's role will include executing activities, closely monitoring planned works and activities, and




_For Official Use Only_
                          playing a role in institutional capacity building and strengthening of decentralized service delivery. To strengthen the PIU
                          and provide day-to-day backstopping, additional technical experts including fiduciary (financial management,
                          procurement, contract management), environment and social specialists will be contracted through an integrated
                          Technical Assistance firm that will be competitively recruited to support both technical and operational aspects of project
                          implementation.

                          37.     Project Steering Committee. A Project Steering Committee will be established to provide project oversight, review
                          annual work plans and budgets, and validate annual project reports prepared by the SONEDE. The Project Steering
                          Committee will be chaired by the Minister of MARHP and comprise representatives of: SONEDE, MEP, MF and the Central
                          Bank of Tunisia. The secretariat of the Project Steering Committee will be assumed by the SONEDE. SONEDE will also
                          closely collaborate throughout project implementation with other government stakeholders such as the Ministries of
                          Health, Environment and Social Affairs.

                          38.       Project Operational Manual (POM). A POM will be prepared and approved by the World Bank by Effectiveness.
                          It will be updated during the project as needed and subject to World Bank’s prior review.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank




                                                                                                                                                 Page 12
                               The World Bank
                               Potable Water Security and Resilience Project (P514340)


                           Stephane Dahan
                           Senior Water Specialist

                           Floris Dalemans
                           Water Specialist

                           Habab Taifour
                           Lead Water Specialist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Ministry of Economy and Planning

                          Implementing Agencies
                           SONEDE

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




_For Official Use Only_
                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                    Stephane Dahan, Floris Dalemans, Habab Taifour

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:               Michael Haney                          10-Jan-2026

                          Country Director:                       Alexandre Arrobbio                     06-Feb-2026




                          Note to Task Team: This is the end of document. No further content should be added. Delete this note when
                          finalizing the document.




                                                                                                                                      Page 13
