Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Yemen Health Nutrition And Wash Project (P514502)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 12/13/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05362




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 15, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Health Nutrition And Wash Project (P514502)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P514502                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       HNWP                         2026

                     Operation Name            Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Yemen, Republic of        Yemen, Republic of                       MID EAST,NORTH               Health, Nutrition &
                                                                                        AFRICA,AFG,PAK               Population

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     United Nations Office     WHO, UNOPS, UNICEF                       06-Apr-2026                  27-May-2026
                     for Project Services,
                     World Health
                     Organization, United
                     Nations Children’s



Public Disclosure
                     Fund

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     08-Dec-2025               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The project development objective is to deliver integrated health, nutrition and WASH services to targeted areas of
                     Yemen while building local institutional capacity.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Since 2017, the World Bank has supported Yemen’s health sector through large-scale emergency operations that have
                     delivered essential health, nutrition, and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services to millions, while gradually
                     investing in local institutions and systems. These efforts have sustained human capital in a protracted crisis, reaching

                    Dec 15, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Health Nutrition And Wash Project (P514502)



                     nearly 24 million beneficiaries and training over 18,000 health personnel. Despite achievements, challenges in Yemen
                     persist—including low immunization rates, malnutrition, conflict-related access constraints, declining donor funding,
                     and reliance on external third-party implementation. The upcoming operation will prioritize integration to address
                     malnutrition, strengthen local capacity, and revamp health workforce development by aligning community cadres with
                     national strategies, improving training systems, and creating job opportunities for health workers. It will also
                     consolidate health and WASH service delivery for efficiency, invest in solar energy to reduce fuel dependence, and
                     introduce new implementation modalities to enhance sustainability and local ownership. The project will consist of 5
                     components: Component 1: Delivery of integrated health, nutrition and WASH services: Component 1 will prioritize
                     delivering an integrated minimum service package (MSP) across all levels of care—primary, secondary, and tertiary. A
                     Geographic Accelerator sub-component will tailor area-based interventions to local needs, combining MSP delivery with
                     nutrition, WASH, and social protection interventions. Component 2: Systems building for sustainable delivery of health,
                     nutrition and WASH services: Component 2 focuses on building sustainable systems for health, nutrition, and WASH
                     service delivery by strengthening sub-national institutions and the health workforce. It includes tailored training for
                     ministries and local health offices in planning, monitoring, and financial management, alongside support for refining
                     national health strategies. A dedicated subcomponent will address critical health workforce reforms, aiming to resolve
                     systemic bottlenecks and establish more sustainable funding mechanisms for health worker salaries. These reforms will
                     also contribute to job creation and retention in the health sector, helping transition from volunteer-based service
                     delivery to a more stable and professionalized workforce. Component 3: Support to prevent and respond to
                     communicable disease outbreaks: Component 3 will retain emergency response capacity through disease surveillance,
                     rapid response teams, laboratory support, and public health campaigns, with potential links to pandemic fund
                     initiatives. It will also deliver emergency water trucking and fuel to hospitals and water facilities, while establishing clear




Public Disclosure
                     transition plans to phase out reliance on fuel and trucking. Component 4: Project management: Component 4 will
                     consist of supervision costs, monitoring and evaluation, third party monitoring and financing of E&S compliance
                     requirements, fiduciary aspects and procurement. Component 5: CERC A zero cost CERC component will support the
                     operation in the case of emergencies.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Yemen is characterized by a predominantly semi-arid climate with limited rainfall and high temperatures, especially in
                     its coastal and desert regions. Despite these challenging conditions, Yemen has rich biodiversity, shaped by its varied
                     topography, ranging from coastal plains and highlands to plateaus and deserts. This project which will be implemented
                     in several governorates in Yemen. Yemen’s overall conditions have deteriorated dramatically over the last decade, leave
                     the country in a profound state of fragility. Yemen’s poverty rate has soared due to conflict, economic collapse, and
                     rising food prices. Almost 80 percent of the population now lives below the poverty line, with rural areas and larger
                     households disproportionately affected. Many facilities require upgrades to their water and sanitation systems to
                     reduce losses, expand service coverage, and improve water quality. Latrines need construction or repair using gender-
                     responsive, disability-accessible designs, and additional handwashing stations are needed in health facilities and public
                     areas to strengthen hygiene practices. Medical waste management remains challenging, particularly final disposal due
                     to the lack of specialized landfills. While many facilities use incineration and autoclaving, others lack such technologies
                     and still resort to improper waste disposal. The specific locations where project sub-components will be implemented
                     have not yet been identified, however, the project will be implemented in urban as well as rural areas, across a diversity
                     of jurisdictions with different environmental, social and institutional settings.


                    Dec 15, 2025                                                                                                          Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Health Nutrition And Wash Project (P514502)



                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Under the proposed project, UNICEF, WHO and UNOPS will be the grant recipients as well as the managing and
                     implementing agencies (IA). During the project preparation, the World Bank ESF team will work together with the three
                     UN agencies to discuss the lessons learned from the previous and ongoing operations, mainly the ongoing Yemen
                     Emergency Human Capital Project (YEHCP - P176570), and reflect them in the new design to avoid any challenges and
                     constraints. Currently, UNICEF, WHO and UNOPS have dedicated and experienced environmental and social teams,
                     comprising environmental specialists, social specialists, gender specialists, and grievance mechanism (GM) focal points.
                     Notably, all agencies have well-established and effective GM systems, featuring multiple channels for receiving and
                     addressing complaints including SEA/SH cases. They have all been able to report, manage, and resolve incidents as
                     required in the ESCP and resolve complaints from all stakeholders and workers, in most cases well within the stated
                     deadlines in their respective Stakeholder Engagement Plans. For each Implementing Agency, quarterly Third Party
                     Monitoring (TPM) reporting will be used to verify implementation of environmental and social measures contained in
                     the various E&S instruments and in the ESCP, in addition to biannual E&S reporting by each IA, and biannual
                     implementation status missions with the World Bank.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The environmental risks and impacts are assessed as Substantial. The implementation of the WASH interventions



Public Disclosure
                     under sub-component 1.2 will include rehabilitating and extending water and sanitation networks,
                     constructing/repairing latrines in health facilities. These activities may generate dust and noise emissions, sludge,
                     debris and other solid and liquid waste leading to surface/ground water contamination. Other potential risks are
                     associated with implementing component 3 which, inter alia, will enhance public health laboratory capabilities, and
                     implement public health campaigns. Key environmental impacts are: medical waste management and community
                     health and safety issues related to transportation, handling, and disposal of vaccines, laboratory materials and tests,
                     medical consumables and associated medical waste; as well as Occupational, Health and Safety (OHS) issues related
                     to vaccination, laboratory testing, and handling of medical supplies.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risks have been assessed as Substantial at this stage, but will be reassessed pending additional project
                     information during appraisal. The main social risks associated with implementing component 3 are: labor risks
                     including forced, child, informal worker risks (including in supply chains) and discriminatory and gender exclusionary
                     labor practices; (vi) community health and safety (including SEA/SH and security management risks); (v) inequality
                     and exclusion risks related to beneficiaries' access to healthcare, nutrition services; and (vi) exclusion, transparency
                     and social trust risks from improper implementation of stakeholder engagement and grievance management. Under
                     Component 1, key anticipated social risks are: community safety due to traffic increase, blocked streets, unsafe
                     construction sites, and SEA/SH risks due to presence of labor; (iv) labor influx leading to conflicts between non-local
                     workers and host communities; labor risks including child, informal and forced labor (including of solar supply chains);
                     temporary land use restrictions and access thus affecting communities and property owners due to works; and (viii)
                     exclusion risks, especially for women and girls related to restrictive norms and Mahram requirements which constrain


                    Dec 15, 2025                                                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Health Nutrition And Wash Project (P514502)



                     women’s mobility and access to health and nutrition services. Under component 2, risks include labor and working
                     conditions such as discriminatory and gender-exclusionary labor practices, normative gender barriers which may
                     impede women’s workforce participation, and SEA/SH risks resulting in possible opportunistic and exploitative
                     behaviors especially for women to receive training and skills development benefits. As WASH activities are also
                     expected to be in existing sites and mainly rehabilitation, physical and/or economic displacement is not expected, but
                     will be confirmed during appraisal.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      E&S risks arise from activities financing medical supplies, drugs, vaccines, cholera response, and public health
                      programs, as well as nationwide campaigns and laboratory system strengthening. Key risks include improper medical
                      waste management; community and occupational health and safety concerns from handling vaccines, lab materials,
                      and medical consumables. Under WASH interventions, construction (mainly rehabilitation) of water and sanitation
                      systems may cause dust, waste generation, water contamination, traffic disruptions, noise, and worker safety issues,
                      though impacts are site-specific and reversible. Installation of small-scale medical waste incinerators also poses air-
                      emission risks. Social risks may include temporary access restrictions to WASH services, potential exclusion of
                      vulnerable groups, elite capture, SEA/SH, labor influx, child/forced/informal labor. An ESMF (or preparation of TORs
                      and/or a screening check list), will be prepared to guide screening.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      Consultations during preparation with project affected parties, including vulnerable groups such as women and youth
                      and interested parties will be conducted during preparation to guide the preparation of the SEP. Each Implementing
                      Agency will implement a grievance mechanism with multiple access channels, inclusive of a SEA/SH-GM process to
                      safely, ethically and confidentially handle incidents related to SEA/SH. Each IA will ensure that all beneficiaries and
                      stakeholders are regularly consulted per their respective SEPs throughout the project lifecycle, including targeting
                      women and other vulnerable groups in consultations and awareness campaigns on the GM.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      An LMP will be prepared to manage OHS and other labor risks in the project, including ensuring all workers have
                      access to a grievance mechanism. The UN Implementing Agencies will be required per the ESCP to cascade ESF
                      responsibilities to contractors and/or national implementing partners, and will be responsible for monitoring and
                      reporting on E&S performance of contractors, including capacity building on ESF requirements.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      Medical waste from vaccination and other activities -including contaminated liquids, sharps, chemicals, and
                      hazardous lab materials-may impact local communities and environment. An ICMWMP will be prepared, and all
                      beneficiary facilities will follow its requirements for safe handling, transport, and disposal of medical and expired
                      waste. The ICMWMP will promote efficient use of resources and climate-friendly cold chain systems. Medical waste

                    Dec 15, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Health Nutrition And Wash Project (P514502)



                      management remains challenging, particularly final disposal due to the lack of specialized landfills. Many facilities use
                      incineration and/or autoclaving, others lack such technologies and resort to improper waste disposal. WASH
                      intervention may generate solid and liquid waste causing environmental and water pollution. These impacts will be
                      mitigated through site-specific instruments, ensuring facilities meet WBG ESHS guidelines and national laws.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      Risks to community health and safety will be addressed in the ESMF and SEA/SH Action Plan. The ESMF will include
                      management of traffic and road safety risks, including use of motorcycles which is commonly used in Yemen, and an
                      ICMWMP will be prepared and will include provisions for managing community health and safety risks related to
                      exposure to hazardous materials, including medical waste. These will be included in biannual IA E&S monitoring
                      reports, Third Party Monitoring reports, and discussed during missions.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                         TBD

                      It is not yet determined if subprojects/activities will be screened out for ESS5 related impacts or if activities will
                      induce permanent and/or temporary physical and/or economic displacement. This will be discussed during
                      preparation. However, as construction activities will be mainly rehabilitative, ESS5 related impacts are not expected.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant as the project will finance the construction and rehabilitation of water supply and sanitation systems,



Public Disclosure
                      including wastewater treatment plants both in rural and urban areas. This might result in potential impacts on
                      biodiversity, particularly in rural areas. Nonetheless, the ESMF will include exclusion criteria that prohibit investments
                      in critical habitats and/or protected areas. In line with ESS6, the project will require a biodiversity assessment,
                      application of the mitigation hierarchy, and, if significant risks are identified, the development of a Biodiversity
                      Management Plan (BMP) or similar planning instrument.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                 Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      There are no known groups in Yemen which meet the criteria of IP/SSAHULTCs under ESS7.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      While impacts to tangible and intangible cultural heritage is not likely, it is marked as relevant in the event if at the
                      subproject level, cultural heritage is discovered. The implementing agencies will include chance finds procedure
                      which will be described in ESMFs/E&S screening and will be included in all site specific ESMPs involving subprojects
                      with earthmoving activities. During screening, any sub-projects or activities which could have impact to any physical
                      cultural resources will be excluded.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      FIs are not included in this project.



                    Dec 15, 2025                                                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Health Nutrition And Wash Project (P514502)




                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            No
                       Use of Borrower Framework is not considered under this project.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       Use of Common Approach is not considered under this project.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     1- Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP): The ESCP will include specific assessments and instruments
                     required to address the identified risks and impacts. It will include a timeline to ensure that necessary instruments are
                     prepared prior to any project activities and include mitigation measures and recommendations to maximize the project


Public Disclosure
                     benefits and emphasize an inclusive approach.
                     2- Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): The SEP will be prepared, consulted upon, disclosed, and cleared by the WB in a
                     manner appropriate and proportionate to project-associated risks.
                     3- Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): The ESMF will outline the requirements for screening,
                     categorization, assessment, monitoring, reporting, and capacity building requirements under the project (advanced
                     draft). This may be replaced by TORs to guide the preparation of ESMPs and/or an ES Screening checklist and will be
                     discussed during appraisal.
                     4. Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) action plan

                     During implementation:
                     1- Labor Management Procedures (LMP):
                     2- Infection Prevention and Control & Medical Waste Management Plan (IPCMWMP)
                     3- Security Management Plan (SMP)
                     4- Resettlement Framework (RF) - To be determined during appraisal
                     5- Site-specific ESMPs/ESIAs




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank


                    Dec 15, 2025                                                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Health Nutrition And Wash Project (P514502)



                      Task Team Leader:       Avril Dawn Kaplan                    Title:       Senior Health Specialist

                      Email:                  akaplan1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom              Job Title:   Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                Specialist

                      Email:                  nabulohom@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Arsala Deane                         Job Title:   Senior Operations Officer

                      Email:                  adeane@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Public Disclosure
                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                     Avril Dawn Kaplan, Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom, Arsala Deane

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:            Amer Abdulwahab Ali Al-Ghorbany

                     ADM Social Specialist:                   Gina Cosentino




                    Dec 15, 2025                                                                                            Page 8 of 8
