Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)



                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                       Project Information Document (PID)

Public Disclosure Authorized



           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01592




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                      Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                                                                                  Jobs, Social Cohesion and
                                                         EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                     Community Resilience in
                          Mozambique                                                 P514199
                                                         AFRICA                                                   Northern Mozambique -
                                                                                                                  Phase I
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         26-Mar-2026                 12-May-2026                  Urban, Resilience and Land
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Northern Integrated
                          Republic of Mozambique         Development Agency




_For Official Use Only_
                                                         (ADIN)

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Strengthen community engagement, improve economic inclusion, and increase access to resilient infrastructure in
                          targeted areas of northern Mozambique

                          Components
                          Strengthening Community and Government Collaboration
                          Improving Access to Economic Opportunities and Jobs
                          Improving Access to Climate Resilient Infrastructure
                          Improving Project Management and Coordination and Financing a Learning Agenda
                          Contingent Emergency Response

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  No
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                         100.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                              100.00


                                                                                                                                            Page 1
                                  The World Bank
                                  Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                                           of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                    100.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00

                           DETAILS
                              World Bank Group Financing
                                International Development Association (IDA)                                                                     100.00
                                   IDA Grant                                                                                                    100.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial




_For Official Use Only_
                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context

                          1.       Within a high poverty rate context, Mozambique is experiencing multiple and interconnected fragility
                          challenges, particularly in its Northern Region. The country’s poverty rate has remained persistently high—approximately
                          81 percent since 2022—with the highest rates concentrated in the Northern and Central regions.1 Cabo Delgado, the
                          northernmost and resource-rich province that houses the country’s significant Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) reserves, has
                          been the epicenter of an eight-year conflict that is rooted in a complex confluence of socioeconomic and governance
                          deficits. These are linked to the broad-based exclusion of large parts of the population from access to opportunities,
                          resources, and services, amplified by patchy state presence, regional and spatial disparities, and non-inclusive
                          development that has privileged the south over the north and center of the country. The conflict has resulted in 6,515
                          fatalities from political violence as of end-March 2026,2 and 461,745 internally displaced people (IDPs) as of end-March
                          2025, down from a peak of 1.2 million in November 2022.3 Attacks have risen since mid-2024 and escalated in 2025 in
                          Cabo Delagado province after the general elections and spread into the two other northern provinces of Nampula and
                          Niassa, prompting repeat displacements.

                          2.      Women and youth have been particularly affected by the conflict. Gender disparities in Mozambique are most
                          acute in the northern provinces, where conflict, displacement, and climate shocks have compounded women’s limited

                          1 World Bank. 2025. Mozambique Poverty and Equity Brief: October 2025. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
                          2 According to Armed Conflict Location and Event Data (ACLED) Mozambique Conflict Monitor Update of March 25, 2026.
                          3 International Organization for Migration (IOM) Displacement Tracking Matrix Round 22.



                                                                                                                                                   Page 2
                                 The World Bank
                                 Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                          access to education, health, and livelihoods, resulting in stark regional asymmetries in agency, human capital, and
                          resilience. The northern provinces have seen high rates of gender-based violence (GBV): 24.4 percent of women aged 15-
                          59 reporting physical violence in Cabo Delgado province, 20.6 percent in Nampula, and 7.9 percent in Niassa4; while men
                          have higher rates of emotional violence committed by an intimate partner in the northern provinces.5 Women’s small and
                          medium enterprises face acute financing constraints—especially in northern Mozambique—where low land and ID
                          ownership, sparse banking infrastructure, and a persistent gender gap in account ownership (26 percent of women versus
                          40 percent of men) keep women reliant on informal finance, resulting in limited firm growth.

                          3.       Limited jobs and economic inclusion pose a major challenge for the socio-economic integration of men, women,
                          and youth in the north, and for conflict mitigation. Structural challenges to accessing productive employment
                          opportunities include educational deficits, a mismatch between the skills held and taught by young people and the actual
                          needs of the private sector, and limited infrastructure. A further challenge is the lack of diversified economic opportunities,
                          in a market that is characterized by high levels of informality – with up to 80 percent of workers engaged in subsistence
                          farming or informal trading.6 The restart of LNG investments in northern Mozambique in 2026 positions the country as an
                          emerging gas giant with investments tipped at over US$60 billion and proven reserves estimated at about 100 trillion cubic
                          feet, with significant multiplier effects in terms of economic opportunities if the benefits are managed equitably,
                          inclusively, and transparently. Youth face particular impediments to their socio-economic inclusion, with high
                          unemployment rates—6.1 percent in Cabo Delgado, 6.6 percent in Nampula, and 5 percent in Niassa,7 deriving from low
                          technical skills and barriers to access to finance. These challenges hold back youth economic growth and decrease their




_For Official Use Only_
                          competitiveness in the private sector, as compared to youth from Maputo or overseas. The resulting disaffection and
                          sense of exclusion risks make young people more susceptible to radicalization towards violent extremism or to illicit
                          activities.

                          4.       Climate change and the impact of extreme climate events, to which Mozambique has long been exposed,
                          further exacerbate these challenges. According to the 2021 Global Climate Risk Index, in 2019 Mozambique was the
                          country most affected by climate change because of its location, extensive coastline, and large expanse of low-
                          lying- hinterland. Projected rising temperatures, more irregular rainfalls, and related sea level rise are expected to increase
                          the frequency and intensity of droughts, floods, and cyclones.8 Mozambique’s provisional Nationally Determined
                          Contribution (NDC) 3.0 for 2026-2035 reaffirms the priorities of the 2023-2032 National Adaptation Plan (NAP), namely:
                          (i) creating an environment conducive to integrating adaptation into planning and budgeting at the national, provincial,
                          and district levels, (ii) improving capacity to manage and share data and information, access technology, and finance
                          adaptation; and (iii) implementing adaptation actions for greater resilience of the most vulnerable at the district level.

                           Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          5.       The impacts of the conflict in the north have worn away at the social fabric of communities, exacerbating
                          fragility factors, and generating new tensions. Although inter-group conflict has not historically been a line of fracture in
                          the north, the conflict, displacement, dislocation, and associated trauma are upending the social fabric and hardening
                          identity lines (with emerging ethnic and religious fissures, and tensions between IDPs and host communities, and between
                          returnees and those who stayed), contributing to growing mistrust between groups and communities. Emerging tensions

                          4 National Institute of Statistics and ICF. 2024. Demographic and Health Survey in Mozambique 2022–23. Maputo, Mozambique and Rockville,

                          Maryland, USA.
                          5 Ibid.
                          6 Center for Democracy and Development, 2022 and International Growth Center, 2026.
                          7 National Statistics Institute of Mozambique. 2022 and Household Budget Survey, 2022. Maputo, Mozambique.
                          8 World Bank Group. Mozambique - Country Climate and Development Report. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.



                                                                                                                                                             Page 3
                                 The World Bank
                                 Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                          in this context are exacerbated by limited trust in state authorities and a further retrenchment of the public administration
                          in conflict-hit areas, underscoring the weakness of both horizontal and vertical cohesion in the northern provinces and
                          risking the rise of secondary conflicts.

                          6.      Access to community and public infrastructure is particularly limited in the north, which has affected the
                          provision of basic services, livelihoods, and economic inclusion for vulnerable communities. The destruction of
                          community and public infrastructure due to the conflict and cyclones has widened the existing urban-rural infrastructure
                          gap in the northern provinces. Schools, health units, water systems, and other infrastructure and services have been
                          closed, severely damaged, or destroyed, and the repeat displacements of IDPs have increased pressure on already-
                          stretched services. In 2021, the government launched reconstruction activities in Cabo Delgado; however, the resurgence
                          of attacks from mid-2024 has deepened existing trauma and further amplified the conflict’s impacts.

                          7.        To rebuild trust between communities and the state, to support local economies, and to mitigate risks of a
                          spreading conflict, the government is renewing its focus on decentralization, community participation, and locally led
                          economic development. Between 2005 and 2015, the government established participatory Consultative Councils at the
                          district, locality, and administrative post levels to plan, implement, and monitor local development initiatives with the
                          support of community-based economic organizations. Although these programs were successful at mobilizing
                          communities, they were discontinued in 2016 due to limited government budgets. The government is now reinstating
                          these initiatives, with the newly constituted Ministry of Planning and Development (Ministério do Planejamento e




_For Official Use Only_
                          Desenvolvimento, MPD) taking the lead. This includes devolution of security, justice, finance, and land use responsibilities
                          from the Provincial Secretary of State to the Provincial Governors and return of provincial service staff to the provincial
                          directorates under the Governor to enhance provinces’ ability to lead local development. In 2025, MPD launched a revised
                          participatory planning and budgeting tool to guide local development and piloted it in Cabo Delgado and Nampula
                          provinces. The government has also strengthened the mandate of the Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water
                          Resources (Ministério de Obras Públicas, Habitação e Recursos Hídricos) to oversee public infrastructure design and
                          development and in June 2025 it established the National Public Works Administration (Administração Nacional de Obras
                          Públicas, ANOP) with province-level delegations to address public infrastructure gaps and oversee investments.

                          8.      The government has formulated a peacebuilding, recovery, and development program for northern
                          Mozambique as a planning blueprint to guide the region’s trajectory towards peaceful and inclusive development. In
                          June 2022, the government approved the Integrated Development and Resilience Program for the North (Programa
                          Integrado de Desenvolvimento e Resiliência para o Norte, PREDIN) to enhance peacebuilding, resilience, social cohesion,
                          and economic recovery in the region. PREDIN is coordinated by the Northern Integrated Development Agency (Agência
                          de Desenvolvimento Integrado do Norte, ADIN) - a semi-autonomous agency under MPD. The government also approved
                          terms of reference for a Northern Regional Consultative Forum (NRCF) consisting of the governors and secretaries of state
                          for the provinces, as well as for provincial observatories to facilitate dialogue between districts within a given province.
                          The NRCF has not yet been operationalized due to lack of capacity, financing, and technical knowledge, while the provincial
                          observatories in the three northern provinces have only had a single inaugural meeting each, in 2025. PREDIN
                          complements the government’s Reconstruction Plan for Cabo Delgado (Plano de Reconstrução de Cabo Delgado, PRCD),
                          which facilitates the return of IDPs and supports long-term socio-economic development by rehabilitating infrastructure,
                          restoring public services, and stimulating economic activity in impacted districts.

                          9.      The World Bank’s recent and pipeline interventions underpin the government’s program for the north. In 2021,
                          the World Bank initiated a coordinated package of six projects as part of the process to secure the country’s eligibility to
                          the Prevention and Resilience Allocation (PRA) under IDA19 and to support the implementation of PREDIN and PRCD.
                          These operations have sought to respond to the immediate impacts of the conflict and to lay foundations for recovery,


                                                                                                                                                  Page 4
                                   The World Bank
                                   Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                          peacebuilding, and medium and long-term development by addressing the root causes of the conflict. More recently, the
                          World Bank has advanced a more long-term development vision for Mozambique through several Multiphase
                          Programmatic Approach (MPA) programs, including the pipeline Agribusiness Value Chains Development Program
                          (P513560), which facilitates agribusiness and access to markets for communities in the Nacala corridor, the Skills for
                          Employment and Economic Transformation in Mozambique (P513981), which strengthens the skills ecosystem across the
                          country, the Mozambique State Capacity Enhancement Project (P514896), which aims to boost the capacity of the public
                          administration, and a forthcoming MPA engagement on gas.

                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)

                             10.     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen community engagement, improve economic
                             inclusion, and increase access to resilient infrastructure in targeted areas of northern Mozambique.

                            Key Results

                          11.       The PDO will be measured by the following PDO-level Indicator:




_For Official Use Only_
                                (a) Localities implementing participatory local planning processes (Number)
                                (b) More and better-paid jobs (Number)
                                (c) People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number, disaggregated for female and youth)

                            D. Project Description

                          12.      The project will be the first operation of an MPA, conceived to allow scalability of World Bank support for local
                          development in rural northern Mozambique. The program design envisages two simultaneous phases that strengthen
                          community engagement and improve communities’ access to economic opportunities and jobs as key means to enhancing
                          social cohesion, while gradually strengthening local government systems for development.

                                (a) Phase I – Building foundations for engagement, economic inclusion, and resilient infrastructure. A US$100
                                    million International Development Bank (IDA) grant activates regional, provincial, and district-level multi-
                                    stakeholder dialogue forums; finances a cash transfer program for vulnerable households to establish or expand
                                    livelihoods and create jobs; supports small and medium-sized women and youth socio-economic enterprises
                                    through grants across the three provinces as a means for building of horizontal social capital and creating long-
                                    term jobs; supports youth upskilling in Skills Incubation Centers (SICs) to further integrate youth into society and
                                    create jobs; creates awareness and provides GBV and psycho-social support services in districts with high IDP
                                    populations; develops and rolls out participatory local planning tools in all 56 districts; supports the development
                                    and rehabilitation of locally led community infrastructure in 80 vulnerable and in-need localities within these
                                    districts;9 and finances the rehabilitation of damaged public infrastructure and construction of new public
                                    infrastructure in ten Cabo Delgado district. Phase I also assesses public infrastructure needs in Nampula and Niassa
                                    provinces and prepares reconstruction and rehabilitation bidding documents for financing under Phase II. The



                          9 Informed by a needs and vulnerability assessment carried out by the World Bank and validated by the client.



                                                                                                                                                    Page 5
                                   The World Bank
                                   Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                                   technical and operational capacity of the districts is strengthened to assume implementation responsibilities in
                                   Phase II.

                                (b) Phase II – Scaling up, sustaining, and digitizing systems and service delivery. A US$150 million IDA grant ensures
                                    the sustainability of regional, provincial, and district-level dialogue forums; provides financial and technical
                                    support to additional vulnerable people and small and medium women and youth socio-economic enterprises;
                                    upskills more youth in SICs; provides GBV psycho-social support services to additional communities in need;
                                    develops and implements community infrastructure in 120 additional localities based on an updated needs and
                                    vulnerability assessment; and finances the rehabilitation or construction of prioritized public infrastructure in
                                    Niassa and Nampula provinces. Phase II also rolls out digital public service delivery infrastructure to better
                                    integrate the northern provinces with the national service delivery systems to further enhance the social cohesion
                                    outcome and helps digitize the government’s cash transfer program. The launch of Phase II will be contingent on
                                    the satisfactory implementation of Phase I.

                          13.       Phase I will finance the following components:

                           Component 1: Strengthening Community and Government Collaboration (US$7 million)




_For Official Use Only_
                          14.     Sub-component 1.1: Mobilizing dialogue forums (US$2 million). This sub-component will activate the NRCF to
                          become a dynamic and inclusive semi-annual northern cross-province dialogue forum, where the governors from the
                          three provinces and government and community representatives from the districts will jointly discuss and monitor the
                          implementation of provincial development strategies. The project will finance the cost of meetings and workshops, as well
                          as exchanges within the region. The project will also support the development of a communication strategy to ensure that
                          the objectives of the dialogue forums and the process of constituting them and selecting participants is clearly
                          communicated to all stakeholders as a way of building complicity and ensuring transparency. The sub-component will also
                          activate provincial observatories (one in each northern province) that will bring together district government and
                          community representatives to monitor the implementation of district development strategies; and mobilize existing and
                          new district-level Consultative Councils to facilitate regular dialogue between the districts and community groups and
                          between different groups at the community level, by financing their operating costs and training. The Project Operations
                          Manual will specify the level of representation and role of communities in these forums and establish protocols for
                          transparent and accountable decision-making processes.

                          15.      Sub-component 1.2: Developing District-level Development Plans (US$5 million). This sub-component will
                          finance the incorporation of climate resilience considerations into MPD’s 2025 participatory planning and budgeting tool
                          and provide training to district, provincial, and central project teams on its use. Under the oversight of the National
                          Directorate for Planning (DNP), the District Implementation Team (DITs), with the support of Community Facilitators (CFs),
                          will engage with the selected localities to carry out a community mapping exercise to identify needs, and develop
                          community projects (one per locality) that answer key needs, to be financed under sub-component 3.1 within a financing
                          envelope determined by the locality’s population size. Consultative committees of elected representatives of IDPs, host
                          communities, returnees, men, women, youth, and people with disabilities will identify the projects. The selected projects
                          will prioritize creating jobs and facilitating engagement with the private sector and address issues of accessibility,
                          manpower, power sources, and availability of local skills and services to ensure projects’ viability. Each project will include
                          an operation and maintenance (O&M) plan specifying the revenue source used to sustain the investments. The projects
                          will be compiled into District Level Development Plans (DLDPs) to be reviewed and approved by the District Executive
                          Committee, headed by the District Administrator, who will ensure that projects reflect recorded community needs, are
                          eligible, viable, and sustainable, are aligned with the financial envelope, do not have negative impacts on neighboring

                                                                                                                                                    Page 6
                                The World Bank
                                Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                          localities, and create local jobs. The approved DLDPs will be endorsed by the provincial government. The CFs will be
                          competitively recruited as volunteers, trained by the district teams, and provided with stipends and communication tools
                          to coordinate the mapping exercises. The Project Operations Manual will outline transparent and inclusive project
                          selection and approval processes.

                           Component 2: Improving Access to Economic Opportunities and Jobs (US$22 million)

                          16.     Sub-component 2.1: Supporting cash transfers, youth upskilling, and women and youth socio-economic
                          enterprises (US$20 million). This component will finance:

                               (a) Cash transfers to vulnerable people (US$8,000,000): This sub-component will provide cash transfers and to the
                                   most vulnerable households in the 56 districts to mitigate welfare shocks, stabilize household consumption, and
                                   promote economic inclusion, while mitigating risks of recruitment to violent extremism. Cash transfers will also
                                   reduce people’s reliance on climate-sensitive and environmentally degrading practices, including charcoal
                                   production, wood extraction, bush burning for hunting, and unsustainable fishing, particularly in coastal and
                                   riverine districts. The design and implementation of this intervention will build on the model of Mozambique’s
                                   Productive Social Action Program (PASP) - a social protection initiative designed to support vulnerable
                                   households, managed by the National Institute of Social Action (Instituto Nacional da Acção Social). A Grants
                                   Manual will provide adaptations to the PASP model to reflect participatory and transparent selection of the




_For Official Use Only_
                                   vulnerable households, rules for cash uses with emphasis on initiating or expanding small businesses with
                                   emphasis on productive assets and job creation, and transparent monitoring procedures to ensure that
                                   resources are used by the households for eligible expenses. The households will be encouraged and receive
                                   project support to establish savings groups to further enhance the use of the resources. The selection process
                                   will be informed by local conflict and political economy analysis and social inclusion considerations to ensure
                                   equitable access to resources, to avoid exacerbating tensions, prioritizing women and youth, and to strengthen
                                   community resilience. This intervention will strengthen Mozambique’s social protection systems, such as
                                   targeting tools, existing registry of vulnerable families, digital payments mechanisms, and others, in
                                   consideration of the fragile context. By stabilizing incomes, the intervention will reduce pressure on natural
                                   resources and support more sustainable livelihood strategies. This sub-component will use strategic
                                   partnerships with third-party providers for implementation.

                               (b) Youth upskilling (US$4,000,000): SICs - one in each province—such as tertiary technical colleges or universities,
                                   will deliver technical and vocational training, technology skills courses, artisanal courses, mentorship, and
                                   certification guidance to youth in professions relevant to local market demand. The SICs will also provide training
                                   to participating youth on climate risk management, resilient business practices and integration of resilience
                                   measures into business plans. The Project Operations Manual will define transparent, inclusive, and conflict-
                                   sensitive procedures for beneficiary identification and selection.

                               (c) Support to women and youth socio-economic enterprises (US$8,000,000): The project will provide grants to
                                   existing women and youth enterprises to, inter alia, implement their business plans, expand operations, and
                                   generate employment opportunities, including for youth graduating from the SICs. The grants will help
                                   enterprises integrate measures to reduce their climate risks, such as basic planning for floods, droughts, or other
                                   disruptions that may affect their operations. The grant amount will be split evenly between women enterprises
                                   and youth/people with disabilities enterprises. A grants manual will specify eligibility criteria and a
                                   transparent application process that mitigates risks of elite capture.



                                                                                                                                                  Page 7
                                 The World Bank
                                 Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                          17.      Youth upskilling and support to socio-economic enterprises will be informed by a market needs assessment to
                          be carried out in consultation with private sector actors, including from the LNG industry, to determine the existing and
                          future economic opportunities and market access and thus ensure viability and sustainability of the skills provided and
                          enterprises supported.

                          18.      Sub-component 2.2: Providing GBV and psycho-social support services (US$2 million). This sub-component will
                          focus on GBV prevention and response through an integrated package of awareness raising and community engagement
                          activities to make sure that trauma survivors are in a better position to participate in economic activities. Targeted social
                          and behavior change communication campaigns on GBV, sexual and reproductive health, and mental health will be
                          implemented across the three provinces using theater, radio, and printed materials, complemented by community
                          engagement through the World Bank Gender Action Learning System (GALS) and other psycho-social support programs in
                          districts with high IDP populations to address underlying drivers of GBV. The project will strengthen existing district and
                          community level structures to improve GBV prevention, referral, and response by reinforcing the capacity of community-
                          based mechanisms and strengthening coordination and referral pathways with formal service providers to ensure timely
                          access to medical, psycho-social, and legal support. Implementation will be carried out in close coordination with the
                          Capacity Building for Improved GBV Response Project (P502471) to ensure alignment and leverage ongoing capacity
                          building and system strengthening efforts at district and community levels.

                           Component 3: Improving Access to Climate Resilient Infrastructure (US$66 million)




_For Official Use Only_
                          19.      Sub-component 3.1: Providing climate resilient community infrastructure (US$20 million). This sub-component
                          will finance the design, development/rehabilitation, and supervision of the community infrastructure projects selected by
                          the communities under sub-component 1.2, and preferably ones that enable the participation of community members in
                          labor and monitoring, as financed under sub-component 2.1. The design of the infrastructure will be carried out by the
                          relevant district departments with the support of the provincial Public Works Department and ANOP, while the tendering
                          will be done by the district secretaries under the leadership of the District Permanent Secretary.

                          20.      Sub-component 3.2. Providing climate resilient public infrastructure (US$46 million). This sub-component will
                          finance the construction, rehabilitation, and supervision of climate resilient public infrastructure works that were
                          prioritized by the government under the Northern Crisis Recovery Project (NCRP, P176157) to serve IDPs in relocation
                          sites, host communities, and returnees in ten districts in Cabo Delgado.10 The infrastructure includes, inter alia,
                          administrative post headquarters offices, locality secretariat offices, primary and secondary schools, health centers,
                          district hospitals, houses for teachers, nurses, and doctors, community markets, multipurpose social spaces, and water
                          supply systems. The sub-component will also finance the supervision of works and assessment of damage and
                          vulnerabilities of public infrastructure in Niassa and Nampula provinces, and the preparation of bidding documents for
                          the works by ANOP, for financing by Phase II. ADIN, in collaboration with ANOP and the provinces, will lead the
                          implementation of this sub-component, while ANOP will provide technical designs and quality assurance to ensure
                          resilient construction. Works will engage community members as laborers to enhance participation, ownership, and
                          accountability, and to provide employment. Following completion, infrastructure under this sub-component will be
                          handed over to the respective provincial and district authorities for service delivery to local populations, with support
                          from active World Bank operations in the north. Incomes generated through employment under sub-components 3.1 and
                          3.2 are expected to reduce dependence on natural resource extraction. Wages will enable households to access more
                          durable and climate-resilient construction materials, reducing the use of locally sourced materials, and contributing to
                          more resilient housing practices.

                          10 Balama, Chiúre, Muidumbe, Meluco, Mecufi, Metuge, Mocimboa da Praia, Montepuez, Namuno, and Palma.



                                                                                                                                                  Page 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                          21.     Component 4: Improving Project Management and Coordination and Financing a Learning Agenda (US$5
                          million). This component will finance the operating costs of an ADIN-housed Program Coordination Unit (PCU), Provincial
                          Project Teams (PPTs) and DITs that will coordinate and manage the project from fiduciary, environmental and social (E&S)
                          risk management, grievance redress, and M&E perspectives. It will also finance the incremental operating costs of a
                          Steering Committee (SC) and the regional and district dialogue forums and the costs of communication activities. The
                          component will also support the development of a climate finance roadmap for MPD’s National Directorate of Climate
                          Finance to secure climate finance for the Northern Region to further enhance community resilience. Finally, this
                          component will finance capacity evaluations, impact assessments, perception surveys, and localized needs assessments
                          in support of the program’s learning agenda. The component costs reflect these expenses and the expected elevated costs
                          of work in remote and at-risk areas.

                          22.      Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response (CERC) (US$0). This component will enable access to rapid
                          financing by providing for a possible reallocation of uncommitted project funds in the event of a natural disaster, either
                          by a formal declaration of emergency by the national or provincial government or upon a formal request from the
                          Government of Mozambique. A CERC Manual and an Emergency Action Plan will be prepared separately and approved by
                          the World Bank, which will constitute a disbursement condition for the CERC. If this component is activated, the project
                          will be restructured to reallocate funds, and to revise the PDO, indicators, and implementation arrangements as needed.
                          The CERC activities will be carried out in accordance with the CERC Manual and the Emergency Action Plan.




_For Official Use Only_
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                                        Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                       No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                                 No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          23.      The project’s E&S Risk Classification is Substantial, reflecting implementation across 56 fragile, conflict-affected
                          districts characterized by insecurity, displacement, weak institutional presence, and limited administrative capacity at
                          subnational levels. Environmental risks are primarily associated with small- to medium-scale community and public
                          infrastructure works, and include localized soil disturbance, erosion, waste management challenges, material sourcing
                          from informal borrow areas, water quality risks, and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) hazards in labor-intensive
                          works. Social risks are driven largely by contextual fragility and include exclusion and elite capture risks in participatory
                          processes, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) exposure in FCV settings, labor management
                          challenges, community health and safety risks, and operational constraints linked to insecurity. Land acquisition needs are
                          not currently defined; however, ESS5 screening procedures are embedded in the Environmental and Social Management
                          Framework (ESMF) to ensure that any potential impacts are identified and addressed prior to commencement of works.
                          An ESMF, Labor Management Procedures (LMP), a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), and an Environmental and Social
                          Commitment Plan (ESCP) will guide risk management.11 The ESMF establishes screening and risk categorization
                          procedures, exclusion criteria, and proportionate mitigation measures, including requirements for site-specific
                          Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Contractor ESMPs (C-ESMPs). Environmental, Social, Health
                          and Safety (ESHS) provisions—including OHS standards, Codes of Conduct, SEA/SH prevention measures, incident

                          11 The ESCP, SEP, and ESMF were disclosed in-country on March 31, 2026, and in the World Bank system on March 30, 2026.



                                                                                                                                                    Page 9
                                 The World Bank
                                 Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                          notification procedures, and community health and safety controls—will be embedded in bidding documents and works
                          contracts. A project-level grievance mechanism, including confidential SEA/SH reporting channels, will operate at district
                          and provincial levels.

                          24.     Institutional capacity constraints are recognized as a key risk factor. The PCU will include dedicated environmental,
                          social/GBV, and security specialists responsible for oversight, reporting, and Environmental and Social Framework (ESF)
                          compliance. At the infrastructure level, ANOP will play a central technical role in quality assurance and supervision of
                          public and community works, ensuring that E&S risk mitigation measures, climate-resilient standards, and OHS
                          requirements are integrated into design, procurement, and execution. The provincial and district focal points will support
                          day-to-day implementation, with targeted capacity building, EIS, and structured supervision arrangements reinforcing
                          compliance in the FCV context. With these measures in place, E&S risks are considered manageable and proportionate to
                          the project’s objectives.

                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          25.      At the national level, MPD will be the Implementing Agency of the two phases through ADIN. A PCU will be




_For Official Use Only_
                          established at ADIN based in Cabo Delgado to strengthen its capacity for overall coordination, monitoring, and reporting
                          of program implementation. The PCU will be composed of a Program Coordinator, who will also be responsible for M&E
                          and reporting, a procurement specialist, a financial management specialist, and environmental, social/GBV, and security
                          risk specialists. The PCU will also provide operational support to the provinces and districts. It will prepare annual work
                          plans and budgets, progress reports, audits, and interim unaudited financial reports. While ADIN will lead social cohesion
                          activities, ANOP will support the technical designs of the construction and rehabilitation of public infrastructure and
                          provide technical support to the provinces and districts and ensure the quality of program-financed infrastructure
                          investments.

                          26.     The PRA’s SC, which was constituted by the government and approved at the Council of Ministers in 2025, will
                          provide political leadership and oversight to the program, review and approve the annual work plans, budgets, and
                          progress reports, and ensure inter-ministerial dialogue and program alignment with PRA milestones. The SC is co-chaired
                          by the Minister of Planning and Development and the Minister of Finance, and its members are the line ministries. The
                          SC’s semi-annual meetings will include a session where ADIN will present the program’s progress reports, work plans,
                          budgets and issues requiring the SC support. The governors of the three northern provinces will be invited to these
                          sessions.

                          27.     At the provincial level, PPTs will be established to support implementation. The three PPTs will be composed of
                          designated focal points from the Provincial Directorates of Finance and Planning (DPPF), Public Works and Housing, and
                          Environment, and they will receive logistical support from ADIN. ADIN and ANOP will provide training to the PPTs to
                          develop their capacity for the implementation of project activities. E&S officers will be hired to strengthen the capacity of
                          the Provincial Directorate of Public Works and Housing (DPOPH) to ensure E&S compliance of activities implemented by
                          the provinces.

                          28.      At the district level, DITs will be established to support implementation. The DITs will be coordinated by the
                          District Permanent Secretaries and comprise designated focal points from the District Service of Planning and
                          Infrastructure, responsible for the design and implementation of public and community infrastructure activities


                                                                                                                                                  Page 10
                                 The World Bank
                                 Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                          (Component 3), while the District Service of Women, Gender, and Social Action will implement local economic inclusion
                          activities (sub-components 2.1 and 2.2), in collaboration with the District Service of Education, Youth, and Technology,
                          and the District Service of Health. The latter two will partner with the District Service of Planning and Infrastructure on
                          any education and health investments, respectively. The DITs will be trained by ADIN and ANOP and receive technical
                          support from the DNP and DNPDI to make sure they have the capacity to implement activities under sub-components 2.1,
                          2.2, 1.2, and 3.1. Once capacity has been established, the districts will assume fiduciary responsibilities for the
                          implementation of activities under sub-component 3.1. The districts will engage CFs and hire service providers, namely
                          local CSOs and companies, to support activities’ implementation. The implementation details are included in the Project
                          Operations Manual.

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Xavier Agostinho Chavana
                             Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                             Neelam Nizar Verjee




_For Official Use Only_
                             Senior Operations Officer

                             Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan
                             Senior Social Development Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            Republic of Mozambique

                           Implementing Agencies
                            Northern Integrated Development Agency (ADIN)

                           FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                           The World Bank
                           1818 H Street, NW
                           Washington, D.C. 20433
                           Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                           Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                           APPROVAL


                           Task Team Leader(s):                       Xavier Agostinho Chavana, Neelam Nizar Verjee, Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan



                                                                                                                                                Page 11
                               The World Bank
                               Jobs, Social Cohesion and Economic Inclusion in Northern Mozambique - Phase I (P514199)


                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:               Catalina Marulanda                    13-Mar-2026

                          Country/Division Director:              Fily Sissoko                          09-Apr-2026




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                         Page 12
