Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project(P514502)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01521




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project(P514502)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
Yemen, Republic of             P514502                      Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
MID EAST,NORTH                 06-Apr-2026                  27-May-2026                   Health, Nutrition &
AFRICA,AFG,PAK                                                                            Population
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project             United Nations Office for    WHO, UNOPS, UNICEF
Financing (IPF)                Project Services, World
                               Health Organization,
                               United Nations Children’s
                               Fund

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to deliver integrated health, nutrition and WASH services to targeted areas of
Yemen while building local institutional capacity.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                           100.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                 65.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                   65.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                   35.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                   65.00

                                                                                                                      Page 1



                                                                                                           Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project(P514502)


           IDA Grant                                                                                                                       65.00




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                          Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                           The review did authorize the preparation to continue




    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context

1.      Yemen faces severe and compounding crises. The poverty rate has soared due to prolonged conflict, economic
collapse, and rising food prices. Yemen ranks as the least developed in the Middle East and North Africa (MNA) region,
positioned 184 out of 193 on the Human Development Index (HDI) in 2025,1 and sixth out of 179 countries on the Fragile
States Index.2 Since the conflict began in 2014, Yemen remains divided between areas controlled by the Houthi (Ansar
Allah) movement—including the capital, Sanaa – and those governed by the Internationally Recognized Government (IRG).
The economy is fragmented, with distinct monetary institutions and exchange rates in IRG and Houthi-controlled areas.
The last official poverty estimate (2014) was 48.6 percent, but recent modeling suggests it reached as high as 74 percent
in 2022.3 Food insecurity is widespread, with 63 percent of households reporting inadequate food consumption in early
2025.4 Nineteen million people are facing food insecurity and need humanitarian assistance,5 and 17.4 million people
need water sanitation and hygiene (WASH) support.5

2.      Yemen is among the countries most affected by climate change. The country has low adaptive capacity, ranking
173 out of 187 on the ND-GAIN Country Index.10 Temperatures are rising, and by 2060, an increase of 1.64°C is expected.11
The country faces more frequent heat waves, changing rainfall patterns, and increased floods, droughts, and tropical
cyclones.12

3.       The combination of these factors disrupts the delivery of essential health, nutrition, and WASH services. Today,
nearly half of all Yemeni children under five are chronically stunted. This serves as a warning signal of chronic deprivation
and failures in essential service delivery.
 Sectoral and Institutional Context



1
    UNDP, Human Development Report, May 2025.
2 World Population Review - Fragile States Index Rankings, https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/fragile-states-index.
3 World Bank, Yemen Poverty and Equity Assessment, February 2024.
4 World Bank, Yemen Poverty and Equity Brief. April 2025.
5 World Bank, Yemen Economic Monitor Spring 2025: Persistent Fragility amid Rising Risks.




                                                                                                                                              Page 2



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project(P514502)


4.       Yemen’s 2020 Human Capital Index estimated that a child born in Yemen will reach only 37 percent of their
potential productivity compared to full health and education—far below the Middle East and North Africa average of 57
percent and similar to low-income countries.6 Since 2013, infant-five and under-five mortality have improved.7 However,
rates of wasting and stunting remain unchanged and among the highest globally. Malnutrition prevents human capital
development by limiting physical growth, impairing learning capacity, and reducing long-term economic productivity.
Stunting stood at 49 percent in 2023.8 Seventeen percent of Yemeni children are underweight or wasted due to acute
malnutrition and 86 percent are anemic.9 One in four women of reproductive age are underweight, and over 70 percent
are anemic—conditions that significantly increase the risk of low-birthweight and preterm infants, maternal complications
such as infections and hemorrhage, and higher rates of newborn illness and mortality. An estimated 2.2 million under-five
children and 1.3 million pregnant and lactating women need to be treated for acute malnutrition in Yemen.10

5.       Years of international investment have strengthened health service delivery, providing a foundation for
addressing malnutrition and stunting, but significant gaps remain. Seventy-one percent of Yemen’s 5,214 primary health
centers (PHCs) receive some form of external support, 11 with forty percent supported directly by the World Bank through
the Emergency Health and Nutrition Project (EHNP, P161809, US$483 million, 2017 - 2021) and Emergency Human Capital
Project (EHCP, P176570, US$592 million, 2021 - 2026). The heavy reliance on external support makes health service
delivery highly vulnerable to funding fluctuations. While antenatal care and skilled birth attendance have increased since
2013, full immunization coverage has dropped to around 29 percent, and vaccination outreach has been suspended in
Houthi-controlled governorates.12 Nearly five million women of childbearing age, including pregnant and breastfeeding
women, face challenges accessing reproductive health services, especially in rural districts.13 The health worker-to-
population ratio is just 12 per 10,000—about half the World Health Organization’s recommended minimum—and health
workers in Houthi-controlled areas have gone without salaries for over two years. Most health workers in Yemen depend
on per diem or incentive payments funded by international actors—payments intended as temporary support, not full
salaries.

6.       Access to safe water and sanitation is limited due to damaged infrastructure, water scarcity, and recurrent
droughts, undermining health and nutrition outcomes. Before the conflict, water service coverage barely reached 50
percent of the population. Today, the public network serves less than 25 percent of the population due to damaged
infrastructure, water scarcity, recurrent droughts and lack of financial resources and public energy. Only 21 percent of
WASH facilities are fully functional in the 16 cities assessed.19 Most PHCs (59 percent) have no water and depend on water
trucking, whereas 26 percent have no sanitation facilities.14 Behavioral aspects of WASH, such as hygiene promotion and
use of clean water, are essential for disease prevention and improved health outcomes. Yet, only about half of households
understand the importance of handwashing at appropriate times. 15


     Relationship to CPF

6 World Bank, Yemen Human Capital Index Brief 2020, September 2020.
72022-2023 Yemen Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS).
8 2022-2023 Yemen Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS).
9 2022-2023 Yemen Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS).
10
     Yemen SMART surveys.
11 UNICEF. Yemen Primary Care Facility Assessment – December 2024.
12 2022-2023 Yemen Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS).

13 UNFPA. (UNFPA), SITUATION REPORT CRISIS IN YEMEN July – September 2025.
14 UNICEF. Yemen Primary Care Facility Assessment – December 2024.
15 Yemen SMART Survey (2022).




                                                                                                                      Page 3



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project(P514502)


7.       The proposed Project will contribute to outcome 1 of the FY26-28 World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) for Yemen on improved nutrition and food security. Aligning with the CPF, the Project will prioritize investments
through geographic targeting. The Project will invest in multisectoral interventions to reduce malnutrition and stunting,
through convergence of interventions in health, nutrition, WASH and social protection in target governorates. The Project
is fully aligned with the World Bank’s Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) Strategy, which emphasizes sustained
engagement in fragile contexts, preservation of human capital, and resilience to climate and conflict shocks. The Project
will address critical drivers of fragility by ensuring equal and safe access to essential health and nutrition services,
improving WASH outcomes, and strengthening local institutions to maintain service delivery in a highly fragmented
environment. The Project will strengthen frontline and community capacity and promote local ownership and
accountability, relying on decentralized health institutions to deliver services while also supporting interventions to
address gender norms affecting nutrition outcomes for women and children. Finally, the Project is aligned with the goals
of the Paris Alignment and supports Yemen’s adaptation to climate change and will not cause any increase in greenhouse
gas emissions.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 8.       Deliver integrated health, nutrition and WASH services to targeted areas of Yemen while building local
 institutional capacity.

   Key Results (From PCN)
9.      The achievement of the PDO will be measured through the following PDO level results indicators:
    • Enhanced capacity of Yemeni institutions (i.e.: IRG Health and Water Ministries; Governorate and District Level
        Health Offices; Health Departments within universities and training institutes; Local Water and Sanitation
        Corporations; Autonomous Utilities)
    • Reduced low birth rate in target governorates
    • Increase in exclusive breastfeeding rates in targeted communities
    • Number of beneficiaries reached with integrated health, WASH and social protection interventions
    • People receiving quality health, nutrition and population services (disaggregated by level of care)16

 D. Concept Description

10.     The Project will build on the eight years of achieved gains of the two predecessor projects, EHNP and EHCP. A
key strength of the ongoing EHCP is its use of country platforms to deliver cost-effective health and WASH services. Rather
than relying on non-governmental organizations or establishing parallel systems, the Project leveraged Yemen’s existing
health workforce and health facilities, as well as the Urban Water and Sanitation Project Management Units (UWSS-PMU),
Local Water and Sanitation Corporations (LWSCs), branches and Autonomous Utilities (AUs) and the branches of the
General Authority of the Rural Water Project (GARWSP). The project has provided essential health and WASH services
across the country despite extremely difficult implementation circumstances. Third-party monitoring (TPM) has provided
robust information for analysis and supervision, and course correction during implementation.

11.     Building on its predecessors, the proposed Project will prioritize integration to address malnutrition, strengthen
local capacity, and revamp health workforce development. This will be done by aligning community cadres with national

16 The Corporate Scorecard indicator for HNP




                                                                                                                       Page 4



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project(P514502)


strategies, institutionalizing training systems, and creating job opportunities for women. To this end, the new operation
will seek greater convergence between health, WASH, and social protection interventions to ensure that activities are
geo-located to target communities.

COMPONENT 1: Delivery of Integrated Health, Nutrition, and WASH Services

12.      Component 1 will integrate health, nutrition, WASH, and social protection interventions in alignment with the
Scaling Up Nutrition Secretariat and the government-led Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Action Plan. Sub-component 1.1 will
deliver comprehensive health services across 11 governorates—Ad Dali’, Aden, Al Hodeidah, Dhamar, Hadramawt, Hajjah,
Ibb, Lahj, Sana’a (including Sana’a City), Shabwah, and Ta’iz—which together account for 78 percent of Yemen’s stunted
children.17 These governorates will fully overlap with those covered under the forthcoming Social Protection Project, as
well as the governorates reached by the Aden-Tuban and Wadi Hajir basins under the Yemen Improved Water
Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562). Additionally, seven of the eleven
governorates intersect with the Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129), ensuring strong
geographic and programmatic synergies. Sub-component 1.2 will introduce a Geographic Accelerator program,
strategically co-locating WASH and social protection activities to reach the same beneficiaries with multiple services,
addressing the multisectoral drivers of malnutrition. Depending on financing, further co-location will be explored.

SUB-COMPONENT 1.1: Prioritizing and optimizing the delivery of an integrated minimum service package (MSP) across
the continuum of care

13.     This sub-component will prioritize delivering a Minimum Service Package (MSP) across all levels of care—
primary, secondary, and tertiary in facilities supported by the Project. Governorate-level plans will be co-developed by
an implementing agency and Governorate and District Health Offices, which play a critical role in supervising service
delivery, to map referral networks and allocate resources to ensure women and children in high-need districts have access
to comprehensive health services. This collaborative process will aim to strengthen the capacity of local health authorities
in planning, management, data analysis and identify areas where domestic resources for health can be mobilized.

14.      A comprehensive review of the MSP implemented in primary care facilities will be conducted during
preparation. Currently, UNICEF implements the MSP at the primary care level with financing from the World Bank, FCDO,
and GAVI—all of which face significant reductions in health sector funding. As a result, the number of PHCs supported by
the World Bank is expected to decline under the new project. The review will define the support package for each facility
and establish prioritization criteria for selecting PHCs within target governorates. The updated MSP, which currently
covers essential maternal, child and reproductive health services, will place greater emphasis on maternal nutrition,
breastfeeding support, and preventive care, ensuring kits are context-specific and responsive to district needs for
efficiency. Key nutrition-specific interventions for prenatal care will include, but not be limited to, Multiple Micronutrient
Supplementation (MMS), calcium supplementation, and Intermittent Preventive Treatment of malaria in pregnancy
(IPTp). For children under five, nutrition-sensitive interventions will include, but not be limited to, delayed Umbilical Cord
Clamping (DCC), Kangaroo Mother Care (KMC), Vitamin A supplementation, prophylactic zinc, ORS + Zinc for diarrhea,
Infant and Young Child Nutrition (IYCN) counseling, micronutrient powders (MNP), and treatment of Severe Acute
Malnutrition (SAM). During preparation, efforts will engage other donors to align support with the MSP approach and
promote a coordinated, systematic response across partners.

17
     Using SMART 2021 estimates for stunting rates. Subject to change during Appraisal.

                                                                                                                          Page 5



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project(P514502)



15.      New implementing partners and approaches will be explored for MSP delivery at secondary and tertiary levels.
WHO currently supports these levels by financing inputs for 117 hospitals, 64 therapeutic feeding centers, and 8 National
Blood Transfusion Centers. The estimated number of secondary and tertiary facilities to be supported under the proposed
Project decreases to around 40 hospitals, 40 Therapeutic Feeding Centers and three National Blood Transfusion Centers.
To strengthen planning across the full continuum of care and improve efficiency, A review of the MSP for secondary and
tertiary care will be conducted during preparation to define the support package and establish principles for facility
selection. During preparation, efforts will also focus on engaging with other donors to adopt the MSP approach in hospitals
in IRG governorates.

16.      While this sub-component will target approximately 11 governorates, it will still maintain the flexibility to
respond to cholera and other disease outbreaks nationwide. This includes cholera preparedness and prevention
activities such as, but not limited to, prepositioning of supplies, evidence generation, sustaining and strengthening oral
rehydration corners and diarrhea treatment centers.

17.      This sub-component will finance in-service training for health workers through structured mentorship models.
It will build on UNICEF’s proven, cost-effective approach at the primary care level while introducing an enhanced model
that engages hospital staff to mentor colleagues at primary care facilities. In addition to strengthening clinical quality of
care, these mentorship models will aim to improve the quality of GBV services and foster respectful, person-centered care
across the continuum of services.

SUBCOMPONENT 1.2: Geographic Accelerator Program

18.     Using governorate-level plans and local health authorities under sub-component 1.1, the Geographic
Accelerator Program will tailor interventions to local needs through rapid area-based assessments. It will design
integrated service bundles combining nutrition, WASH, and social protection measures. Key activities include:

      •   Coordination and Monitoring: Coordination and monitoring will be managed through a convergence scorecard
          implemented by community health workers and tracked at district and governorate levels to measure multi-
          sectoral progress.

      •   WASH Infrastructure: To restore essential water and sanitation services in underserved areas, an implementing
          agency will lead targeted investments in WASH infrastructure at health facilities and in communities. These efforts
          will include rehabilitating and extending water and sanitation networks to reduce losses, improve coverage, and
          enhance water quality. Latrines in health facilities will be constructed or repaired with gender-responsive and
          disability-accessible designs, and handwashing stations will be installed in targeted health facilities and public
          spaces to strengthen hygiene practices. Nature-based and engineered flood prevention measures will protect
          critical infrastructure, while climate adaptation strategies—such as rainwater harvesting, decentralized storage,
          leakage control, pressure management, and water-saving technologies—will help manage drought and variability.
          Community engagement will support operation and maintenance, and utilities will receive training on asset
          management, energy efficiency, and climate risk planning.




                                                                                                                         Page 6



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project(P514502)


      •   Solar Systems: To improve service reliability and reduce operational costs, implementing agency will also install
          solar systems at targeted hospitals and pumping stations. These systems will replace or hybridize diesel generation
          and ensure continuity of services during grid outages or fuel shortages.

      •   Social Behavior Change and Communication: an implementing agency will implement social behavior change and
          communication activities to deliver unified health, nutrition, WASH, and social protection messages through
          community mobilizers, radio, and social media. These activities will target the behavioral aspects of WASH.
          Gender-responsive interventions will engage both women and men at the household level, including piloting and
          evaluating an adapted men’s engagement curriculum with support from Yemeni women-led organizations. These
          activities aim to reduce gender inequalities, promote shared decision-making, and sustain positive nutrition
          practices and equitable relationships at household and community levels.

      •   Link to Social Protection: While Component 1 will not directly provide cash transfers, it will work closely with the
          upcoming Social Protection Project by training staff involved in registration for vulnerable households. This
          collaboration will harmonize messaging, targeting, and planning, strengthening demand-side measures without
          duplicating efforts.


COMPONENT 2: Systems building for sustainable delivery of health, nutrition and WASH services

19.      This component focuses on building sustainable systems for health, nutrition, and WASH service delivery by
strengthening sub-national institutions and the health workforce. It includes tailored training for line ministries, local
health and water offices, LWSCs, branches and AUs in planning, monitoring, and financial management, alongside support
for refining national health strategies. A dedicated subcomponent will address critical health workforce reforms, aiming
to resolve systemic bottlenecks and establish more sustainable funding mechanisms for health worker salaries and
support recruitment and retention and career growth of female staff. These reforms will also contribute to job creation
and retention in the health sector, helping transition from volunteer-based service delivery to a more stable and
professionalized health workforce.

SUBCOMPONENT 2.1: Build capacity of national and sub-national institutions to deliver quality health, nutrition and
WASH services

20.      This subcomponent focuses on building organizational capacity. For the health sector, an implementing agency
will build on the findings of an organizational capacity assessment that is currently being conducted by the World Bank.
An implementing agency will support the IRG Ministry of Public Health and Population (MoPHP) as well as Governorate
and District Health Offices in target governorates across key health system functions, including health system
management, planning, monitoring, and financial management. The subcomponent may also support the refinement and
rollout of existing national health policies, protocols (including GBV and SEA/SH system wide protocols), and quality
standards, and will establish quality improvement committees at the district level, potentially beginning with a select
number of District Health Offices. For the WASH sector, an implementing agency will lead organizational capacity building
for UWSS-PMU, PWP, LWSC, branches, AUs and the branches of GARWSP. Key priorities include strengthening operations
through staff training and modernizing information systems; improving financial management with better billing and
collection, strategic planning and conducting technical and sanitation studies; promoting sustainability through better
groundwater management and training on energy efficiency; and enhancing community engagement by updating
customer data and empowering Water User Associations.

                                                                                                                          Page 7



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project(P514502)



SUBCOMPONENT 2.2: Strengthen national health workforce to deliver high quality care

21.     This subcomponent focuses on restructuring the healthcare workforce and creating a sustainable plan to phase
out health worker per diems. A comprehensive National Health Workforce Development Plan will be developed that
includes workforce mapping, forecasting, and strategies to improve retention—particularly for women and those in rural
areas—while establishing career pathways. The plan will also outline a clear transition framework for health workforce
financing. A local implementing partner may be subcontracted to strengthen pre-service training through diploma
programs and continuous professional development. Work with national institutions will further address normative
gender barriers to ensure women’s sustained participation in the health workforce.18

COMPONENT 3: Support to prevent and respond to communicable disease outbreaks

22.     This component aims to maintain strong emergency response capacity by strengthening disease surveillance
systems nationwide. Throughout the entire country, the project will support rapid response teams, enhance public health
laboratory capabilities, and implement targeted public health campaigns. Emergency water trucking and fuel to hospitals
and water facilities will be provided and supported under Component 1 or in areas experiencing outbreaks, while
continuing transition plans to reduce reliance on fuel deliveries and water trucking. Additionally, water quality testing
through existing laboratories will be supported.

COMPONENT 4: Project management

23.      This component will cover all project management functions, including supervision costs, monitoring and
evaluation, third-party monitoring, and the financing of environmental and social risk management requirements, as well
as fiduciary and procurement responsibilities.

COMPONENT 5: Contingent Emergency Response Category

24.    A zero cost CERC component will support the operation in the case of emergencies. An Emergency Response
Operational Manual will be prepared and agreed with the World Bank for use if this component is triggered.

25.     Under the proposed project, UNICEF, UNOPS, and WHO will serve as grant recipients as well as managing and
implementing entities on an exceptional basis. All three agencies have extensive experience operating in fragility, conflict,
and violence (FCV) contexts, including Yemen, and have successfully managed World Bank-financed projects such as EHCP,
EHNP, YCRP, and YIUSEP. A local implementing partner may also be introduced to support pre service training of health
workers, alongside national training institutes and universities.


  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                             Policies                                              Triggered?



18 World Bank. (2025), Health Action Brief


                                                                                                                         Page 8



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project(P514502)



Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                          No
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                    No



Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Avril Dawn Kaplan
 Senior Health Specialist

 Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom
 Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

 Arsala Deane
 Senior Operations Officer

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 United Nations Office for Project Services

 World Health Organization

 United Nations Children’s Fund

Implementing Agencies
 WHO

 UNOPS

 UNICEF

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                                                                                  Page 9



                                                                          Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Yemen Health Nutrition and WASH Project(P514502)


The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                  Avril Dawn Kaplan, Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom, Arsala Deane

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:             Michele Gragnolati                  01-Dec-2025

Country Director:                     Dina N. Abu-Ghaida                  18-Dec-2025




                                                                                                        Page 10



                                                                                                 Official Use Only
