Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                     Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                    Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Mar-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01635




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                                                                                     Comoros - Accelerated
                                                         EASTERN AND SOUTHERN
                          Comoros                                                     P514166                        Access to Water, Sanitation
                                                         AFRICA
                                                                                                                     and Hygiene (WASH) MPA
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         06-Mar-2026                  31-Mar-2026                    Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Ministry of Water, Energy
                          Union of the Comoros
                                                         and Hydrocarbons




_For Official Use Only_
                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Increase access to climate-resilient drinking water supply, sanitation and hygiene services in Comoros, and strengthen
                          sector governance

                          Components
                          Component 1: Strengthening Platforms to Accelerate Access to WASH
                          Component 2: Advancing Reforms, Governance, and Regulation
                          Component 3: Improving Service Delivery Performance
                          Component 4: Increasing Access to Climate-Resilient WASH Infrastructure
                          Component 5: Project management

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                            29.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                                 29.00
                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                   29.00


                                                                                                                                              Page 1



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)



                              Financing Gap                                                                                                        0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                                International Development Association (IDA)                                                                      29.00
                                  IDA Grant                                                                                                      29.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Moderate


                           Decision




_For Official Use Only_
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context

                          1.        The Union of the Comoros, a small island developing state located in the Indian Ocean between Madagascar
                          and the East African coast, faces severe structural challenges stemming from its small market size, geographic isolation,
                          institutional fragility, and high vulnerability to climate change. With an estimated population of about 870,000
                          inhabitants distributed across all islands, the country’s development trajectory is constrained by limited natural resources,
                          fiscal fragility, and frequent climate shocks. Nearly 90 percent of the population live in climate-vulnerable low-lying coastal
                          areas exposed to cyclones, flooding, erosion, and saline intrusion. Cyclone Kenneth of 2019 caused damages equivalent
                          to nearly 25 percent of GDP, revealing systemic weaknesses in resilience of infrastructure and delivery of public services.
                          Growth has been persistently subdued. Accordingly, the country has an opportunity to strengthen its resilience and
                          responsiveness to shocks by establishing pre-positioned funding mechanisms that will enhance future crisis response
                          efforts. Since independence in 1975, Comoros has averaged just 2.6 percent annual GDP growth (1980–2023), with per
                          capita income hovering at about US$1,530.1 Growth accelerated to 3 percent during 2020–2023. Low economic growth
                          has resulted in high poverty rates at 38.2 percent of the population in 2023 (using the lower middle-income poverty rate
                          threshold) (KMF 41,495 per capita per month). However, Comoros’s economic growth rose to 3.4 percent in 2024, fueled

                          1 2025. World Bank. “The Union of Comoros Economic Update.” June.



                                                                                                                                                    Page 2



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)


                          by private consumption and the services sector, as tourism related activities grew by 4.5 percent and is expected to
                          average 3.8 percent over 2025–2027.

                          1.      Climate change poses significant risk to the Comorian economy that depends heavily on remittances,
                          subsistence agriculture, and public expenditure, with limited fiscal space for capital investment. Comoros remains
                          exposed to high risk of coastal floods, extreme heat and cyclone hazards as well as rising temperatures and sea levels.
                          Coupled with cyclones and more extreme precipitation events, this will lead to increased sea level surges and a higher risk
                          of coastal inundation.2 Agriculture in Comoros is the largest employer and second largest sector, and accounted for 31.6%
                          of GDP between 2011 and 20173. Hence, addressing climate vulnerabilities along with systemic service and governance
                          weaknesses in the water and sanitation sector is critical for strengthening national resilience, protecting public health,
                          and enabling sustainable development.

                           Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          3.       Water insecurity continues to define the landscape throughout the territory of the Comoros. The islands
                          experience water insecurity differently with each island experiencing distinct yet interlinked challenges that are
                          increasingly exacerbated by climate change. In Grande Comores, the largest island with an estimated population of 379
                          367 inhabitants, the absence of permanent rivers makes communities almost entirely dependent on shallow aquifers and




_For Official Use Only_
                          rainwater harvesting. Frequent pump failures, saline intrusion driven by sea level rise, and limited storage capacity
                          translate into daily struggles for thousands of families. Despite having the nation’s richest network of rivers and streams,
                          estimated at 47000 m3/day4, Anjouan, the second largest island with a population of 327 382 inhabitants, suffers from
                          dilapidated network and inadequate and poor water supply to its inhabitants. Moheli, the smallest island with a population
                          of 51 567 inhabitants5, derives its main sources of drinking water from small river catchments and springs located in upland
                          zones. Decades of limited maintenance and deforestation in catchment areas have severely reduced the reliability of these
                          systems while rising temperatures and increasingly erratic precipitation patterns threaten water quality and supply. Across
                          all islands, power outages power outages from mostly diesel-fuel small thermal generators in addition to some
                          hydropower generation in Anjouan, limited maintenance capacity, and uncoordinated institutional responsibilities
                          compound these problems.6

                          4.       While the physical and hydrogeological characteristics of the islands differ, the underlying patterns are
                          consistent. Dwindling water sources, unreliable access, undersized water distribution systems, and inadequate
                          management structures leave households, especially women and children, bearing the brunt of water insecurity that is
                          increasingly exacerbated by climate change. This insecurity directly affects livelihoods and social stability, with women
                          spending hours each day in the search for water, sacrificing time for education, childcare, and income-generating
                          activities. Farmers report crop losses during dry seasons due to inadequate irrigation, while households spend significant
                          resources on water trucking, delivered by privately-owned water trucks.

                          5.      While an estimated 80 percent of households have access to basic drinking water, service reliability and quality
                          remain low. In urban centers, intermittent supply and high non-revenue water (NRW) constrain service continuity. In rural

                          2 2025, World Bank. Climate Country Risk Profile Comoros.
                          3 World Bank 2019: Towards a more united and prosperous Union of Comoros.
                          4 Consultation 2005
                          5 2017 census
                          6 2025. “Stakeholder Engagement Report: Comoros Water Security Diagnostics—Community Consultations.” October.



                                                                                                                                                  Page 3



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)


                          areas, many community water systems are non-functional due to poor operation and maintenance. Sanitation access
                          remains limited—only 36 percent of households have access to basic sanitation, and the country lacks any wastewater or
                          fecal sludge treatment facility, with reports of raw sewage being directly discharged to local streams and to the ocean.
                          These deficiencies contribute to high rates of waterborne diseases, especially affecting women and children. Climate
                          change is expected to exacerbate O&M as well as public health challenges by increasing rainfall variability, saltwater
                          intrusion, and storm intensity.

                          6.       In rural areas, water supply schemes currently operate through a mix of community-based management and
                          limited utility involvement, with municipalities nominally owning assets and community committees handling day-to-day
                          operations and fee collection. Capital investments have largely been financed by donor projects and community/diaspora
                          contributions, while operations and maintenance are funded through locally set tariffs - typically per-container charges in
                          community-run systems that are insufficient for full cost recovery, resulting in chronic underfunding and uneven service
                          quality.

                          7.       Recent Water Security Diagnostics undertaken for Comoros found that, while women remain the primary
                          managers of household water, bearing the greatest burden of scarcity, their representation in formal water governance
                          remains extremely limited, with fewer than 15 percent of local committee members being women. The diagnostics
                          further found that, in several communities, women have begun organizing water-user groups to advocate for repairs and




_For Official Use Only_
                          equitable distribution. 7 Strengthening gender inclusion in governance and identifying targeted measures to enhance
                          women’s participation and leadership in decision-making is therefore a critical component of water security reform.

                          8.      Support of the World Bank for the water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) sector in Comoros is critical in
                          promoting provision of climate resilient WASH services in the country. The Comoros National Water Resilience Project
                          (CNWRP, P504691, $20m, approved June 2024) is financing climate-resilient infrastructure for the production, storage and
                          distribution of water in the capital city. The project provides significant technical assistance to the national water utility,
                          (Société Nationale d'Exploitation et de Distribution des Eaux, (SONEDE8)), as well as the consolidation of the currently
                          fragmented institutional mandate for WASH into one entity, the Direction Générale pour l'Eau, l'Assainissement et
                          l'Hygiène (General Directorate for Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (DGEAH)).

                          9.       While the Water Code of 2021 establishes the legal foundation for an Integrated Water Resources Management
                          (IWRM) framework, implementation remains partial, with overlapping responsibilities, fragmented authority, and
                          weak enforcement mechanisms. As a result, water governance across Ngazidja, Mohéli, and Anjouan operates through a
                          mosaic of systems, national utility services, municipal oversight, and community committees, each functioning largely in
                          isolation. This fragmented water governance creates gaps in operations, uneven coverage, undermines equity and
                          accountability, and weakens system resilience to shocks and climate variability.

                          10.     The expected establishment of the DGEAH within the Ministère de l'Energie, de l'Eau et des Hydrocarbures
                          (Ministry of Energy, Water and Hydrocarbons (MEEH)), as the national entity responsible for policy formulation,
                          coordination, and planning, will for the first time provide a dedicated government counterpart for sector leadership.
                          Though a decree for its establishment has been prepared, its approval and ratification remain delayed. Enhanced
                          momentum and traction under the newly appointed sector leadership is expected to hasten the process. SONEDE, on the
                          other hand, will benefit from a dedicated performance improvement program under the CNWRP, aimed at enhancing

                          7 These include Sima, Mremani, and Nioumachoi.
                          8 The government created SONEDE in 2018 as a stand-alone water utility mandated to provide clean drinking water services to the people of Comoros

                          under Presidential Decree No. 18-079/PR.

                                                                                                                                                                      Page 4



                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)


                          operational efficiency, reducing NRW, modernizing billing and collection systems, and improving financial transparency.
                          The program includes capacity building in asset management, preventive maintenance, and customer relations, laying the
                          groundwork for sustained improvements in institutional performance.

                          11.     In parallel, a set of strategic studies and technical analyses, financed under the sister project, the Regional
                          Climate Resilience Project (RCRP – P180171) have been launched. These include detailed engineering studies for
                          alternative water sources for the capital city, Moroni, additional water storage capacity, replacement of dilapidated
                          distribution infrastructure, and solarization of pumping stations. These studies will provide a robust analytical base for
                          investments and policy decisions to strengthen climate resilience while also improving mitigation outcomes.

                          12.      Based on the findings of the studies, priority infrastructure works will be undertaken under the CNWRP to
                          rehabilitate and expand production, storage, and distribution systems of the capital city, Moroni. These are aimed at
                          improving water reliability, reducing leakages, and enhancing climate resilience. Complementary investments will include
                          the acquisition of O&M equipment, digital tools, and smart meters, to further strengthen the operational capacity of
                          SONEDE. Other priority investments to be undertaken include the development of a Water Master Plan, which will guide
                          medium to long-term infrastructure planning for the capital; and for sanitation, a feasibility study for the country’s first
                          fecal sludge treatment plant to prepare for a sanitation investment in the future.




_For Official Use Only_
                          13.       While these efforts represent important progress, significant challenges remain. The regulatory framework for
                          the water sector in Comoros has historically been characterized by fragmented institutional arrangements and limited
                          oversight capacity. Water supply and sanitation access and service provision remain unequal and unregulated throughout
                          the islands. In rural areas, many water schemes suffer from recurrent breakdowns due to the absence of professionalized
                          management and insufficient funding for maintenance. Tariff setting and performance monitoring of the national water
                          utility, SONEDE, have been managed directly by ministerial decree, with limited mechanisms for independent oversight or
                          consumer protection. This institutional gap has contributed to persistent challenges in service delivery, including
                          widespread dissatisfaction among users regarding water quality, reliability, and affordability.

                          14.     Recognizing these challenges, the government in June 2025 signed a decree establishing a new regulatory
                          agency—Agence de Regulation des Secteurs de l’Energie et de l’Eau (ARSEE) - an independent administrative authority
                          with a cross-sectoral mandate covering energy, water, and sanitation. ARSEE is tasked with strengthening sector
                          governance by developing and enforcing a coherent and transparent regulatory framework—spanning licensing and
                          authorizations, tariff setting and review, performance and quality of service standards, and consumer protection—while
                          coordinating with relevant ministries and utilities to ensure consistent application of sector laws. This nascent agency has
                          the potential of bringing about a significant improvement in sector governance, including a more coherent and transparent
                          framework for regulation, tariff setting, and quality assurance. The agency faces considerable capacity constraints and will
                          require concerted support to effectively fulfill its oversight functions, foster accountability, and ensure that sector reforms
                          translate into tangible improvements for consumers.



                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           Increase access to climate-resilient drinking water supply, sanitation and hygiene services in Comoros, and strengthen
                           sector governance


                                                                                                                                                    Page 5



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)


                             Key Results

                          15.     The Overall Program Development Objective (PrDO) remains unchanged: to increase access to climate-resilient
                          drinking water supply, sanitation and hygiene services in participating countries in the Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE)
                          Region. The project directly contributes to the PrDO of the MPA. The project is fully aligned with the four pillars under the
                          WASH AFE MPA: the Program Pillar 1- National Platforms to Accelerate Access to WASH, maps with Project Component 1;
                          the Program Pillar 2—Addressing Sector Governance aligns with Project Component 2; Program Pillar 3—Service Provider
                          Performance Improvement and Pillar 4—Leveraging Finance to Increase WASH Access directly maps to Project
                          Components 3 and 4.

                          16.     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to climate-resilient drinking water supply,
                          sanitation and hygiene services in Comoros, and strengthen sector governance.

                          17.     Progress towards the PrDO will be measured through three PrDO-indicators, that are also PDO-indicators at the
                          project level. A fourth project specific indicator has been added to measure progress towards improved water service
                          delivery.

                            •     PrDO/PDO Indicator 1: Number of people with access to water supply services. Disaggregated by gender, youth,




_For Official Use Only_
                                  and sub sector (percentage basic and safely managed)
                            •     PrDO/PDO Indicator 2: Number of people with access to sanitation services. Disaggregated by gender, youth, and
                                  sub sector (rural-urban) and level of service (percentage basic and safely managed)
                            •     PrDO/PDO Indicator 3: Number of beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks, disaggregated by gender,
                                  youth, of which people benefiting from climate-resilient infrastructure
                            •     PDO Indicator 4: Strengthened sector governance measured through operationalization of the new water regulator
                                  and the preparation and adoption of a tariff-setting methodology.

                          18.     The Program Framework delivers a systematic and climate change informed approach to WSS access expansion
                          in selected countries in the AFE region. The regional and country-level WASH Platforms will assist each country to
                          implement their national roadmaps towards achieving universal access. Annex 4 includes the MPA Framework matrix.9
                          Countries will join the MPA based on expressed interest and readiness.


                             D. Project Description

                          19.      Building on the foundations created under the CNWRP, the new operation will expand its geographical scope
                          beyond the capital city of Moroni to reach additional communities across the country (mapped to Pillar 4 of the MPA,
                          Financing Climate-Resilient WSS Infrastructure). This expansion aims at addressing persistent challenges by providing
                          targeted support for resilient water and sanitation services in both urban and rural settings. In light of ongoing challenges
                          related to the reliability and adequacy of the water supply for critical public infrastructure, the project will include targeted
                          investments to strengthen water supply systems serving priority facilities, notably the new El-Maarouf National Hospital,
                          with the objective of ensuring continuous, safe, and climate-resilient water services. Outside of the capital city, the project


                          9 This a revised Program Framework, reflecting latest guidance and will be finalized before the appraisal of the MPA.




                                                                                                                                                          Page 6



                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)


                          will prioritize investments in climate resilient community-managed rural water supply schemes. It will also support
                          capacity building for rural water operators and village water committees, equipping them with the technical, managerial,
                          and financial skills needed to sustain and improve service delivery.

                          20.      WASH sector governance fragmentation remains a hindrance to sector progress. Building on progress initiated
                          under P504691, the Project will support the establishment of a government-led National WASH Platform10 that builds
                          upon the institutional foundations laid under P504691 (Comoros National Water Resilience Project) and adapt lessons
                          from Ethiopia’s One WASH approach11. The platform will formalize coordination among line ministries with some level of
                          responsibility for WASH (water, health, education, and finance ministries) through a National WASH Steering Committee
                          and a National WASH Technical Team to align policy, planning, and implementation. Establishment activities will include:
                          (i) constituting committees at the national level with approved TORs; (ii) preparing a National WASH Investment Plan
                          (covering rural, urban, and institutional WASH) and citywide inclusive sanitation plans to guide prioritized, climate-resilient
                          investments and (iii) instituting a joint sector review calendar and a partner coordination forum to align technical
                          assistance and implementation support. The activity will systematize and scale governance progress initiated under
                          P504691 by anchoring the platform under DGEAH and using the Steering and Technical Committees created under
                          P504691 as the basis for the platform’s governance structure. It will further build on sector strategies and policies, and
                          the Grand Moroni master plan developed under P504691, to expand into a national investment plan and citywide inclusive




_For Official Use Only_
                          sanitation planning.

                          21.      The project will support the operationalization of the new water regulator. The newly formed Agence de
                          Regulation des Secteurs de l’Energie et de l’Eau is a laudable step towards governance reforms and more accountable,
                          transparent and effective oversight of utilities, particularly in setting and approving tariffs and establishing service
                          standards, which are currently managed through ad hoc ministerial orders. The project will support the operationalization
                          and capacity building for the agency, by financing essential start-up activities that directly address stakeholder grievances
                          and governance gaps identified in the Light Water Security Diagnostics. Beyond the founding legal instrument, the nascent
                          agency will be in need of a governing body as well as minimum operating budget. Activities will include: (i) tariff-setting
                          methodologies balancing cost recovery and affordability; (ii) service quality standards (continuity, pressure, water quality);
                          (iii) a public-facing consumer feedback and grievance redress mechanism; and (iv) performance reporting and
                          enforcement protocols, including compliance monitoring against standards; (v) the development and promulgation of
                          regulatory instruments. Further, the Agency will benefit from exposure to well-functioning regulators in the region under
                          the regional knowledge pillar of the MPA.

                          22.      The project will support the WBG’s Jobs Framework (mapped to Pillar 3 of the MPA, Improving Service Provision
                          Performance). To help address persistent skills gaps in the water and sanitation (WASH) sector, the project will design,
                          develop, and implement competency-based vocational courses for plumbers, masons, electricians, technicians, and local
                          councils, with a strong focus on constructing and managing climate-resilient infrastructure. Delivery will be anchored in
                          partnerships with accredited technical institutes, SONEDE, and local NGOs/CBOs, and will include hands-on learning
                          through practical modules and a training-of-trainers program to sustain delivery capacity. The operation will integrate
                          digital tools for course delivery and credentialing, and promote regional knowledge sharing to reinforce a robust, inclusive

                          10 A government-led, multi-stakeholder coordination mechanism that brings together all actors working on water, sanitation, and hygiene to plan, finance,

                          implement, and monitor the sector in a harmonized way.
                          11 Ethiopia’s One WASH National Program (OWNP) is a government-led sector-wide approach launched in 2013 that aligns the water, health, education, and finance

                          sectors under “one plan, one budget, and one reporting system”


                                                                                                                                                                                       Page 7



                                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)


                          WASH skills ecosystem nationwide. To improve labor market signaling and service quality, the project will establish a
                          publicly accessible database of qualified professionals, linked to verifiable credentials issued by partner institutions and
                          SONEDE-supervised assessments.

                          23.     The project is aligned with the WBG approach to private sector development and job creation. First, it supports
                          establishing the WASH infrastructure foundation for jobs, which is required for people and businesses to thrive. Second,
                          the project supports business-enabling policies and incubation activities, a predictable regulatory environment, and
                          associated skill development, enabling the domestic private sector to grow and provide jobs in water operations. WASH
                          projects are significant drivers of temporary and full-time employment through construction works and multiplier effects
                          in management and services. These projects are labor-intensive, generating direct employment during construction,
                          maintenance, and management as well as indirect jobs across associated supply chains. Moreover, WSS investments will
                          create induced jobs, such as through time savings from better WASH access. Induced jobs will also be created in other
                          sectors that use water and sanitation as inputs and through productivity improvements. Following WBG guidelines for
                          assessing more or better jobs, the project is estimated to create 1,357 more and better paid jobs12.

                          24.     Unmanaged solid and plastic waste degrades surface and coastal water quality through waste leakage into
                          waterways and coastal areas from direct dumping, leachate, and microplastics, increasing health risks and undermining




_For Official Use Only_
                          WASH investments. The Project will build upon findings of an earlier assessment of land-based plastic pollution13 to
                          support government’s integration of solid waste management into its sanitation strategy to address critical upstream
                          drivers of contamination, protect drinking water sources, and promote human capital through reduced incidences of
                          water-borne diseases. The proposed project will support the preparation of a study to assess the challenges and
                          opportunities related to solid waste management in the country. This study will engage communities and local
                          governments to identify context-appropriate solutions for improved collection, segregation, and safe disposal of solid
                          waste, with the aim of informing future interventions. Further, the project will support strategic pilot interventions in
                          community-based waste management, such as facilities for waste segregation, small-scale composting, decentralized,
                          low-tech sorting and recycling centers and deposit return schemes.

                          25.      The project will support hygiene campaigns to help mitigate perennial outbreaks of cholera and reduce the
                          incidence of other water-borne diseases (mapped to Pillar 3 of the MPA). The Union of the Comoros has faced several
                          cholera outbreaks, with the last official declaration of an outbreak made by the Government on February 2, 2024, affecting
                          all islands, with Anjouan and the capital city of Moroni as the epicenters. The proposed campaign will enhance and build
                          on previous interventions undertaken under Bank-financed health programs. Additional support to prevent and respond
                          to cholera outbreaks will be explored during project preparation.

                          26.     To strengthen institutional capacity and leverage regional knowledge for improved WASH outcomes, the
                          project will support the national platform approach to consolidate government-led efforts to achieve universal,
                          sustainable, and climate-resilient WASH services (mapped to Pillar 1 of the MPA). The initiative will support institutional
                          capacity development for key stakeholders on policy implementation, climate risk management, and gender and inclusion



                          12
                               MBJ Estimate for Comoros
                          13 World Bank. Assessment of Land Based Sources of Plastic Pollution from Cities in the Western Indian Ocean: Institutional and Policy Assessment

                          Report for Comoros. July 2024. Project Reference No 0002002010

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 8



                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)


                          in WASH. The project will also facilitate South-South knowledge exchange, enabling participating countries to share best
                          practices and lessons learned in climate-resilient WASH service provision.




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                             Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




                          In accordance with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), the environmental and social risk
                          classification (ESRC) of the project is rated as moderate. Environmental risk is moderate, and social risk as well as SEAH




_For Official Use Only_
                          risk are moderate. (08) eight Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) have been identified as relevant for the project:
                          ESS1 (Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts); ESS2 (Labor and Working
                          Conditions); ESS3 (Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management); ESS4 (Community Health and
                          Safety); ESS5 Land Acquisition, restrictions on land use and involuntary resettlement; ESS6 (Biodiversity Conservation
                          and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources); ESS8 (Cultural Heritage) and ESS10 (Stakeholder Engagement
                          and Information Disclosure). Overall, the project will bring positive development impacts with respect to people’s access
                          to water improvement. Potential environmental risks and impacts are expected under Components 4, they are linked to
                          the rehabilitation and the construction of water supply infrastructure for Ngazidza, Ndzouani and Mwali. Key anticipated
                          direct, indirect, and cumulative risks and impacts associated with project activities will entail disruption of traffic in the
                          project area due to trench excavation work to install drinking water distribution pipes, OHS risks for workers, community
                          health and safety risks for communities around works sites, waste generation including reservoir sludge, risks related to
                          chemical water treatment, risks of pollution, disturbance of aquatic habitats at water intake sites, inadequate
                          wastewater management that can promote the proliferation of insects, risk of waterborne diseases if water distributed
                          to communities is not well treated and stored appropriately in reservoirs. Project activities will have positive social
                          impacts by improving people’s access to water. Potential adverse social risks and impacts on the communities and
                          population are likely to be temporary, site-specific, reversible, and could be mitigated. The expected social risks and
                          impacts of the Project are mainly related to potential small-scale physical and/or economic displacement, resulting from
                          the potential land acquisition needed for the project’s infrastructure works, as well as adverse economic impacts in
                          informal water vendors who may go out of business once the new water infrastructure is in place, or whose revenues
                          are related to existing water sources; community health and safety risks, including those associated with the expected
                          labor influx, which can potentially lead to increased levels of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual
                          Harrassment (SH), as well as construction accidents for the surrounding population; potential intensification of social
                          tensions and stakeholder opposition resulting from the downstream effects of regulatory and decision-making processes
                          if the new arrangements reduce their current benefits or aspirations; potential impact on cultural heritage sites,
                          particularly during excavations and risk of elite capture of project benefits. Civic and citizen engagment activities. In


                                                                                                                                                    Page 9



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)


                          accordance with the ESS 10 and the Civic and Citizen Engagement (CCE) Guidelines in IPF projects, the project has a
                          citizen engagement indicator (SONEDE complaints resolved within 72 hours) and all other grievances registered should
                          be addressed in accordance with the project's GM). In addition, the project should implement periodic feedback
                          perception surveys to monitor stakeholder engagement and satisfaction with project activities. These activities are part
                          of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). The project will be managed with existing PIU staff of the Comoros National
                          Water Resilience Project (CNWRP - P504691) , which already has an Environmental specialist and a Social specialist to
                          manage E&S risk management of the project. The Bank team will continue providing training on the standards of the ESF
                          during project implementation to strengthen the Borrowers capacity to develop and implement E&S measures, along
                          with other E&S capacity strenghtening measures. The Borrower is preparing a series of instruments and carry out
                          actions to manage the Project’s environmental and social risks. Prior to appraisal, the project will prepare, consult,
                          adopt and disclose: (i) the draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), and (ii) a SEP including the
                          Grievance Mechanism (GM). The project will also prepare a streamlined checklist ESMP, or a specific ESIA/ESMP
                          depending on the nature of the related activities to be implemented and before launching the tender process for any
                          activity requiring such a document. The outcome of the E&S assessments will be considered in the design and
                          implementation of project activities, and no activities or bidding processes will commence before the appropriate
                          instruments and mitigation measures are in place. The project will also update the existing Labor Management
                          Procedures (LMP) developed under the CNWRP project (P504691), and will develop a Resettlement framework based on




_For Official Use Only_
                          the one developed under CNWRP; as well as a standalone SEA/SH Action Plan. A Capacity building action plan on
                          implementation of E&S measures will be also prepared during implementation. Key measures and timelines for the
                          finalized versions of these instruments has been reflected in the ESCP.



                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          27.      The Project implementation will be managed by the existing PIU under the MEEH. The PIU is performing
                          satisfactorily in implementation of the CNWRP. It is responsible for overall project management along with environmental
                          and social standards (ESS), procurement, and budgeting. The established PIU has a project coordinator, and specialists in
                          procurement, financial management, environmental and social safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, and
                          communications. Additional limited staff will be considered to support implementation and monitoring in Anjouan and
                          Moheli. It is expected that these staff will be recruited three months after project effectiveness.

                          28.     The PIU will further be supported by the established Technical Committee and Steering Committee created
                          under the CNWRP. The PIU will be supported by the Technical and Steering Committees established under CNWRP. The
                          Steering Committee—co-chaired by the Secretaries General of the Ministry of Finance, Budget and Banking Sector and
                          the Ministry of Energy, Water, and Hydrocarbons—provides strategic oversight, approves annual plans and budgets,
                          reviews implementation, and ensures stakeholder coordination. The Technical Committee—led by the Director General
                          of Energy, Mines, and Water—coordinates technical inputs including validation of designs and advice on sustainable water
                          resources and infrastructure development. Membership includes key central and local government entities, the utility
                          SONEDE, civil society, and observers drawn from financial and technical partners.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate

                                                                                                                                              Page 10



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               COMOROS - ACCELERATED ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) MPA (P514166)


                          CONTACT POINT

                          World Bank
                           Lewnida Sara
                           Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                           Ousmane Yida Yaya-Bocoum
                           Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Union of the Comoros

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Ministry of Water, Energy and Hydrocarbons

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




_For Official Use Only_
                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                     Lewnida Sara, Ousmane Yida Yaya-Bocoum

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:                Soma Ghosh Moulik                  16-Feb-2026

                          Country/Division Director:               Fily Sissoko                       09-Mar-2026




                                                                                                                           Page 11



                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
