Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Comoros - Accelerated Access To Water, Sanitation And Hygiene (wash) Mpa (P514166)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 03/05/2026 | Report No: ESRSA04815




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 06, 2026                                                                                 Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Comoros - Accelerated Access To Water, Sanitation And Hygiene (wash) Mpa (P514166)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P514166                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      KM WASH MPA                 2026

                     Operation Name            Comoros - Accelerated Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) MPA

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Comoros                   Comoros                                 EASTERN AND                 Water
                                                                                       SOUTHERN AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Union of the              Ministry of Water, Energy and           06-Mar-2026                 31-Mar-2026
                     Comoros                   Hydrocarbons

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     04-Mar-2026               29,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Increase access to climate-resilient drinking water supply, sanitation and hygiene services in Comoros, and strengthen
                     sector governance


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project will build on investments being made under the current water Project for resilience and water security for
                     Comoros. It will expand the current scope and include both water and sanitation investments, and geographically
                     expand beyond the capital city of Moroni to include investments in Anjouan and Moheli islands. Building on the pillars
                     of the parent MPA, the project will have a deliberate focus on leveraging regional knowledge and innovation to enhance
                     sector reforms, governance and service delivery. The project will also support preparatory activities for potential
                     interventions on solid waste management, which negatively impacts water quality, human health and tourism, all of
                     which are critical elements for prosperity.

                    Mar 06, 2026                                                                                                    Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Comoros - Accelerated Access To Water, Sanitation And Hygiene (wash) Mpa (P514166)




                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project is designed to be nationwide in scope, expanding beyond the capital city of Moroni to reach additional
                     communities of the Union of the Comoros: Grande Comore, Anjouan, and Mohéli. It targets both urban and rural
                     settings, with a particular emphasis on community-managed rural water supply schemes and vulnerable populations.
                     Comoros is a located in the Indian Ocean, between Madagascar and the East African coast. The country faces severe
                     structural challenges due to its small market size, geographic isolation, institutional fragility, and high vulnerability to
                     climate change. Nearly 90% of the population lives in low-lying coastal areas exposed to cyclones, flooding, erosion, and
                     saline intrusion. The country is highly susceptible to climate shocks. Water insecurity is a defining feature across the
                     territory, with communities dependent on shallow aquifers, rainwater harvesting, and, in some areas, deteriorated
                     catchments and infrastructure. This insecurity is compounded by power outages, limited maintenance capacity, and
                     uncoordinated institutional responsibilities. The country’s water insecurity is severe, with unreliable sources,
                     dilapidated infrastructure, and only 36% of households having access to basic sanitation. Institutional fragility is
                     significant, but recent reforms include the creation of a new water and energy regulatory agency and consolidation of
                     sector mandates. The project emphasizes gender inclusion, citizen engagement, and disability-inclusive design. The
                     project will finance the construction and rehabilitation of water supply and sanitation infrastructure, including public
                     taps, storage tanks and studies for solid waste management practices with its impact on water quality. Project activities
                     may intersect with sensitive environments, requiring careful site selection and environmental screening in line with the
                     Environmental and Social Framework (ESF).




Public Disclosure
                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Project implementation will be managed by the existing PIU already created under MEEH, responsible for water sector
                     through the Directorate General for Energy, Mines and Water. The borrower have been initiated in managing E&S risks
                     and implementation of measures in line with the ESF standards within the implementation of the Comoros National
                     Water Resilience Project (CNWRP - P504691). An Environmental Specialist and a Social specialist are operational to
                     manage ESRM with some experiences in managing ESF project (CNWRP, and also another WB project suc as the SADC
                     statistic project P175731). The team already received basic standard ESF training but will be reinforced to be able to
                     manage complex situation mainly related to resettlement issues and social conflict. Development and implementation
                     of Capacity building action plan on implementation of E&S measures has been captured as part of the Environmental
                     and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) of the project.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate
                     Environmental risk is rated as "Moderate" . Overall, the project will bring positive development impacts with respect
                     to people’s access to water improvement in Ngazidza (Grande Comore), Ndzouani, and Mwali. The anticipated
                     environmental risks are largely predictable, site-specific, and temporary, associated primarily with construction and
                     rehabilitation activities. The magnitude of risks is considered low to moderate, given the scale of works and the
                     project’s focus on climate resilience and resource efficiency. Key anticipated direct, indirect, and cumulative risks and


                    Mar 06, 2026                                                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Comoros - Accelerated Access To Water, Sanitation And Hygiene (wash) Mpa (P514166)



                     impacts associated with project activities will entail disruption of traffic in the project area due to trench excavation
                     work to install drinking water distribution pipes, OHS risks for workers, community health and safety risks for
                     communities around works sites, road safety concerns due to construction activities, waste generation including
                     reservoir sludge, risks related to chemical water treatment, risks of pollution, inadequate wastewater management
                     that can promote the proliferation of insects, risk of waterborne diseases if water distributed to communities is not
                     well treated and stored appropriately in reservoirs. Risks to biodiversity and habitats are expected to be limited.
                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating for the project is assessed as Moderate. The anticipated social risks are moderate in nature,
                     reflecting the project’s focus on infrastructure upgrades and institutional reforms. Key potential social risks identified
                     include (i) potential small-scale physical and/or economic displacement, resulting from the potential land acquisition
                     needed for the project’s infrastructure works, mainly for the component 4, as well as adverse economic impacts in
                     informal water vendors who may go out of business once the new water infrastructure is in place, or whose revenues
                     are related to existing water sources; (ii) community health and safety risks, including those associated with the
                     expected labor influx, which can potentially lead to increased levels of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual
                     Harrassment (SH), as well as construction accidents for the surrounding population; (iii) potential intensification of
                     social tensions and stakeholder opposition resulting from the downstream effects of regulatory and decision-making
                     processes if the new arrangements reduce their current benefits or aspirations; (iv) potential impact on cultural
                     heritage sites, particularly during excavations. Due to the nature of the expected works and activities, the adverse
                     social impacts are expected to be limited in scale and complexity. The social context of Comoros—characterized by
                     high poverty, gender disparities, and institutional fragility—requires careful attention to inclusion and capacity




Public Disclosure
                     building. The social risk rating will be revisited during project implementation, and measures adjusted accordinlgy.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant. Key potential environmental risks and impacts include the generation of construction waste;
                      pollution, noise, dust, air emissions, and water contamination associated with works; increased traffic and related
                      community safety concerns, accidents, and injuries affecting workers and local communities. Key social risks and
                      impacts are related to the potential for adverse impacts on community livelihoods including impacts on informal
                      water vendors and their customers, on workers and community health, social exclusion, vulnerable groups, impacts
                      related to labor influx; issues related to selection criteria, risks of elite capture; impacts on land and water quality,
                      increased demand for water, and aquatic habitats. To mitigate risks, the project will prepare and implement an
                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment/Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESIA)/ESMP, for sub-
                      projects/activities that require it, particularly the sub-projects of sub-components 4A and 4B of the project,
                      consistent with the relevant ESSs, before launching the tender process for any activity requiring such a document .
                      The project should also develop and implement Capacity building action plan on E&S to stregnth capacity of
                      stakeholder of the project.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant


                    Mar 06, 2026                                                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Comoros - Accelerated Access To Water, Sanitation And Hygiene (wash) Mpa (P514166)



                      ESS10 is relevant. Stakeholder engagement will be undertaken throughout the project lifecycle to ensure that the
                      views and concerns of project-affected parties (PAPs) and other interested parties (OIPs) inform project design and
                      implementation, and to support effective management of environmental and social (E&S) risks. Likely stakeholders
                      include local communities residing near project sites, relevant government ministries and agencies, authorities in the
                      targeted city and island, project affected persons, civil society organizations (CSOs), and groups who may be
                      disadvantaged or vulnerable due to poverty, gender, disability, or remoteness. During preparation the PIU has
                      conducted several consultation with potential project stakeholder, and this will be continued during the
                      implementation of the project. The project has specific component (subcomponent 3B) to contribute to reinforce
                      civic and citizen engagement. In addition the SEP including a project-level Grievance Mechanism (GM), has been
                      prepared, and has been disclosed on february 03th, 2026. The SEP has considered participatory approach to address
                      challenges of elite capture and broad geographic scope. The SEP includes a record of stakeholder engagement
                      activities carried out until then.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant to the project. The project will involve direct workers, contracted workers engaged by third-party
                      contractors and service providers for infrastructure construction, rehabilitation, and maintenance, as well as primary
                      supply workers providing essential materials and equipment. Community workers may also be involved, particularly
                      in rural water scheme management and community-based sanitation and hygiene campaigns. Government civil
                      servants from sectoral agencies will participate in project activities, primarily in oversight and capacity-building roles.
                      Key labor risks include OHS hazards associated with construction and maintenance works, potential gaps in terms and
                      conditions for contracted and community workers, and risks of discrimination or exclusion of vulnerable groups, child



Public Disclosure
                      labor and unfair working conditions. To manage these risks the project has updated the LMP prepared under the
                      CNWRP, to the specific needs of this Project. The LMP should be disclosed no later than three months after the
                      effective date of the project.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant to the whole project. Infrastructure construction and rehabilitation activities may result in pollution
                      to land, water, and air resources as well as use of natural resources : (i) disposal and management of solid and liquid
                      waste during the renovation works; (ii) minor public health concerns from air pollution, noise, dust and to nuisance
                      vibration.; (iii) increased demand on water resources ; (iv) Risk of contamination from poor sanitation and lack of
                      fecal sludge treatment. During the preparation of each activities of the component 2 and 4, screening will be
                      conducted to identify and assess all risks and impacts for projects activities under component 1 associated to relevant
                      requirements of ESS3 (including water use, raw materials, air emissions, vegetation and soil loss, waste management
                      (reservoir sludge, used batteries, electronic and electrical equipments…) and will propose standardized measures to
                      address these risks through specific ESMP.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant to the project. Key potential risks include community exposure to construction hazards, increased
                      traffic and movement of heavy vehicles, potential for labor influx, site access control and risks related to trench
                      management and drowning, risks of waterborne disease transmission, potential gender-based violence (GBV) and
                      sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment (SEA/SH), and impacts on vulnerable groups such as women,


                    Mar 06, 2026                                                                                                         Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Comoros - Accelerated Access To Water, Sanitation And Hygiene (wash) Mpa (P514166)



                      children, and persons with disabilities. The project’s climate-resilient infrastructure focus and emergency response
                      mechanisms further underscore the need for robust community health and safety management. In line with World
                      Bank requirements, these risks will be systematically assessed and managed through the development and
                      implementation of an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), with further refinement during project
                      implementation. The project is currently preparing a SEA/SH Action Plan which will be finalized and disclosed no later
                      than three months after the effective date of the project.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant. The project will finance the construction of independent regulator offices (component 2),
                      construciton, rehabilitation, and expansion of water supply and sanitation infrastructure across urban and rural areas,
                      including new water points, public taps, storage facilities, and climate-resilient sanitation facilities (component 4), .
                      These activities may potentially require land acquisition that could result in small-scale physical and/or economic
                      displacement of individuals or communities, as well as temporary restrictions on land use or access to water and will
                      potentially impacts on communities’s livelihood. While the exact locations and scope of infrastructure investments
                      are not yet fully defined for the whole project, the potential for land-related impacts including impacts on livelihoods
                      involves the application of ESS5. To manage these risks the project is developing a Resettlement Framework (RF)
                      based on the one prepared under the CNWRP, and if needed will develop a site-specific Resettlement Action Plans
                      (RAPs) and/or livelihood restoration plans before finalizing the contract of the contractors in charge of the works
                      concerned. This commitment has been reflected in the ESCP.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant. Impacts to critical and natural habitats are not expected because the project is expected to be
                      implemented in urbanized areas and will focus on rehabilitation of existing infrastructure. Project activities may
                      induce the clearance and loss of areas of vegetation and fauna habitat as well as habitat fragment. There is also a
                      potential impacts on sensitive habitats including those arising from the expanded geographic scope such as
                      disturbance of aquatic habitats at water intake sites during both construction and operation especially in rural and
                      peri-urban areas. Site selection and design will avoid critical habitats; and the project will not support activities or
                      involve subprojects that would significant conversion or degradation of critical habitat. ESIA/ESMPs will include an
                      analysis of risks and potential impacts on biodiversity and natural habitat and develop related appropriate measures
                      to comply with if needed.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is not relevant for this project. There are no Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                      Traditional Local Communities that meet the criteria of IP/SSHAUTLCs, per the requirements of this Standard in
                      Comoros.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      ESS8 is considered relevant to the project, given the planned physical works involving construction, rehabilitation,
                      and expansion of water supply and sanitation infrastructure across the project targeted islands. These activities may


                    Mar 06, 2026                                                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Comoros - Accelerated Access To Water, Sanitation And Hygiene (wash) Mpa (P514166)



                      include earthworks, excavation, and installation of new water points and public sanitation facilities, which could
                      potentially affect tangible and intangible cultural heritage. In accordance with ESS8, the project will require a
                      systematic approach to cultural heritage identification, impact assessment, stakeholder consultation, and the
                      implementation of a Chance Finds Procedure. Should significant cultural heritage be identified or potentially
                      impacted, a Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP) will be prepared as well as part of the ESIA/ESMP to be
                      developed for the project. This commitment has been reflected in the ESCP.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not considered relevant for this project. No financial intermediaries are expected for the project
                      implementation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             No
                       n/a



Public Disclosure
                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       N/A

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     To limit the above E&S risks and impacts, the project has developed:
                     (i) Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP): This document outlines the legally binding E&S commitments of
                     the Borrower, including specific measures and actions to be undertaken to address identified risks and impacts, as well
                     as timelines for their implementation.
                     (ii) Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), already disclosed on February 3th, 2026 including a Grievance Mechanism
                     (GM) and a record of the stakeholder engagement activities carried out during project preparation until then.
                     (iii) Updated Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     The following instruments are expected during project implementation, and has been reflected in the ESCP:
                     - .Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMPs), as needed, These are expected to be ready and prior to
                     starting bidding processes for the corresponding works.
                     - SEA/SH Action Plan, based on the plan developed under Comoros National Water Resilience Project (CNWRP-
                     P504691), but adapted as needed to respond to the specific needs of this Project.
                     - Cultural Heritage Management Plan, if needed, in accordance with E&S provisions as part of the ESMP.


                    Mar 06, 2026                                                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Comoros - Accelerated Access To Water, Sanitation And Hygiene (wash) Mpa (P514166)



                     - Resettlement action plans or livelihood restoration plans, as needed, whose mitigation/compensation measures are
                     expected to be implemented prior to beginning works in the affected areas.

                     - Capacity assessment and Development and implementation of Capacity building action plan on implementation of
                     E&S measures.

                     The Terms of Reference for all technical assistance activities to be supported by the Project will need to be reviewed to
                     ensure consistency with the applicable provisions of the ESF.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Lewnida Sara                            Title:          Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                      Specialist

                      Email:                  lsara@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Ousmane Yida Yaya-Bocoum                Job Title:      Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                      Specialist




Public Disclosure
                      Email:                  oyayabocoum@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                         Lewnida Sara, Ousmane Yida Yaya-Bocoum

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                Paul-Jean Feno, Vaniah Emode Andrianjaka

                     ADM Social Specialist:                       Andrianjaka Rado Razafimandimby, Salohy Soloarivelo




                    Mar 06, 2026                                                                                                     Page 8 of 8
