Public Disclosure Authorized

                                             REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE
                                      MINISTRY OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Northern Mozambique Social Cohesion
                               Community Resilience for Jobs Program –
                                            (P514199)




Public Disclosure Authorized     Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                APPRAISAL VERSION



                                                   March 2026




                                                                             Official Use Only
Table of Contents
1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................ 1
1.1 Country and sector context .......................................................................................... 1
1.2 Project description ........................................................................................................ 1
  1.2.1 Program targeted area.................................................................................................. 1
  1.2.2 Program components ................................................................................................... 2
2 OBJECTIVE OF THE SEP ............................................................................................. 6
3 STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS ........................................... 6
3.1 Methodology .................................................................................................................. 6
3.2 Affected parties ............................................................................................................. 7
3.3 Other interested parties ................................................................................................ 9
3.4 Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups .................................................... 10
4 STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM ....................................................... 11
4.1 Summary of stakeholder engagement undertaken during program preparation 11
4.2 Summary of program stakeholder needs and methods, tools and techniques for
stakeholder engagement ........................................................................................................ 20
4.3 Proposed strategy to incorporate the views of vulnerable groups ......................... 23
5 RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTING
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT .................................................................................... 24
5.1 Implementation arrangements and resources .......................................................... 24
6 GRIEVANCE MECHANISM ....................................................................................... 26
6.1 Description of Grievance Mechanism (GM)............................................................. 26
7 MONITORING AND REPORTING ............................................................................ 30
7.1 Summary of how SEP will be monitored and reported upon ................................. 30
7.2 Reporting back to stakeholder groups ...................................................................... 31
ANNEX 1: TEMPLATE TO CAPTURE CONSULTATION MINUTES ....................... 32
ANNEX 2: SAMPLE GRIEVANCE REGISTRATION FORM....................................... 32
ANNEX 3: SAMPLE TABLE: MONITORING AND REPORTING ON THE SEP ..... 34
ANNEX 4: LIST OF PARTICIPANTS IN PROGRAM PREPARATION
CONSULTATIONS ............................................................................................................... 36

List of Tables
Table 1: Program components ................................................................................................................ 2
Table 2: Stakeholders categorization ...................................................................................................... 7
Table 3: Identified affected parties ......................................................................................................... 8
Table 4: Other interested parties identified ............................................................................................. 9
Table 5: Identified disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups .................................................... 10
Table 6: List of stakeholders’ engagement done during program preparation ..................................... 12
Table 7: Summary of program stakeholder needs and methods, tools and techniques for stakeholder
engagement ........................................................................................................................................... 21
Table 8: Vulnerable groups and proposed techniques for consultation ................................................ 23
Table 9: Budget for the implementation of SEP ................................................................................... 25
Table 10: Description of GM steps ....................................................................................................... 28




                                                                            i



                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
List of Acronyms
ADIN        Northern Integrated Development Agency
ANOP        National Administration of Public Works
AQUA        Environmental Quality Agency
CCPs        Community Fisheries Councils
CERC        Contingent Emergency Response
CFs         Community Facilitators
CGRN        Sustainable Management of Natural Resources Committee
CoC         Code of Conduct
CoEs        Centers of Excellence
CSOs        Civil Society Organizations
DIT         District Implementation Team
DLDPs       District Local Development Plans
DNDEL       National Directorate for Local Development
DNPDI       National Directorate for Promotion of Integrated Development
DPAE        Provincial Directorate of Economic Activities and Environment
DPAP        Provincial Directorate of Agriculture and Fisheries
DPEDH       Provincial Directorate of Education and Human Development
DPOP        Provincial Directorate of Public Works
DPSAS       Provincial Directorate of Health and Social Action
DPTOT       Provincial Directorate of Land and Territorial Planning
E&S         Environmental and Social
ESCP        Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF         Environmental and Social Framework
ESHS        Environmental, Social, Health and Safety
ESIA        Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMP        Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESS         Environmental and Social Standard
FAO         Food and Agriculture Organization
FCV         Fragility, Conflict, and Violence
GALS        Gender Action Learning System
GBV         Gender-Based Violence
GDP         Gross Domestic Product
GM          Grievance Mechanism
GRS         Grievance Redress Service


                                                ii



                                                                            Official Use Only
IDPs     Internally Displaced Persons
INGD     National Institute for Disaster Management
IOM      International Organization for Migration
LCC      Locality Consultative Councils
LMP      Labor Management Procedures
MAAP     Ministry of Agriculture, Environment and Fisheries
M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
MD       Ministry of Defense
MGCAS    Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Action
MI       Ministry of the Interior
MMMR     Mozambican Rural Women’s Movement
MOPHRH   Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water Resources
MPA      Multiphase Programmatic Approach
MPD      Ministry of Planning and Development
MISAU    Ministry of Health
NRCF     Northern Regional Consultative Forum
NGOs     Non-Governmental Organizations
O&M      Operation and Maintenance
OHS      Occupational Health and Safety
PAD      Project Appraisal Document
PASP     Productive Social Action Program
PCU      Project Coordination Unit
PCR      Savings and Revolving Credit Groups
PPT      Provincial Project Team
PREDIN   Programa de Resiliência e Desenvolvimento Integrado do Norte
PWD      Persons with Disabilities
RAP(s)   Resettlement Action Plan(s)
SA       Social Assessment
SC       Steering Committee
SDAE     District Services for Economic Activities
SDEJT    District Education, Youth and Technology Services
SDPI     District Planning and Infrastructure Services
SDSMAS   District Health, Women and Social Action Services
SEA/SH   Sexual Exploitation and Abuse / Sexual Harassment
SEP      Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SMS      Short Message Service

                                            iii



                                                                        Official Use Only
UNICEF   United Nations Children’s Fund
UNOPS    United Nations Office for Project Services
WB       World Bank
WFP      World Food Programme
WHO      World Health Organization




                                           iv



                                                      Official Use Only
1     INTRODUCTION
1.1      Country and sector context
Mozambique is a natural resource-based country experiencing high poverty and inequality rates. An
estimated 81 percent of Mozambique’s 33 million population live under the international poverty line
of US$3 per-day. The benefits of the economic boom and peace dividend that followed the end of the
civil war in 1992 were not distributed in an inclusive manner and growth has since been derailed by a
series of shocks, including the hidden debt crisis (2016), the escalation of insurgency in Northern
Mozambique (since 2017), cyclones (such as Idai and Kenneth in 2019, and Freddy in 2023), and the
COVID-19 pandemic (2020-2022). Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) contracted 2.4 percent year-
on-year in the first half of 2025, mainly due to declines in industry and services1. Within this context,
Mozambique is experiencing multiple and interconnected fragility challenges, particularly in the
Northern Region.

The lack of basic services and community infrastructure has been exacerbated in northern Mozambique
as a result of the violent extremist attacks and cyclones, further restricting livelihood and economic
opportunities for already vulnerable communities. The destruction of infrastructure and economic assets
has widened the existing urban-rural infrastructure gap in Cabo Delgado. Schools, health units, water
systems, and other public and private infrastructure and services have been closed, severely damaged,
or destroyed and the influx of IDPs adds pressure on already-stretched services. While the government
launched recovery efforts in the south and reconstruction actions in the North of Cabo Delgado, violent
extremist attacks resumed in mid-2024 and escalated to districts in northern Nampula and eastern
Niassa, generating a new wave of displacements and destruction of public and private infrastructure.
This has exacerbated grievances related to the lack of access to public services and jobs in the region.

It is in this context that the Government of Mozambique, with the support of the World Bank, is
preparing the Northern Mozambique Social Cohesion Community Resilience for Jobs Program for the
northern region of Mozambique, provinces of Cabo Delgado, Nampula, and Niassa. This document
presents the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) prepared as part of the required Environmental and
Social (E&S) documentation for Northern Mozambique Social Cohesion Community Resilience for
Jobs Program (P514199).

Stakeholder engagement under this Program will be guided by the Mozambican Constitution, which
guarantees citizens’ rights to participation in public life, as well as national decentralization frameworks
and environmental regulations that require public consultation for development interventions. The SEP
is designed to be consistent with these national requirements while meeting the World Bank ESF,
particularly ESS10.

1.2      Project description
The Program Development Objective is to strengthen community and government collaboration and
improve economic inclusion and access to resilient infrastructure in northern Mozambique. The
Northern Integrated Development Agency (ADIN) will be the main coordinating entity of the activities
at the regional level, across the three provinces. The Northern Mozambique Social Cohesion
Community Resilience for Jobs Program is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environment and
Social Framework (ESF).

1.2.1      Program targeted area

Program beneficiaries are local communities across Cabo Delgado, Nampula, and Niassa provinces, as
well as district and province authorities. Women, men, youth, IDP, returnees, and host communities
across the 56 districts will be provided with new and improved resilient community infrastructure, while


1 WB (2026). Northern Mozambique Social Cohesion Community Resilience for Jobs Project (P514199). Project Concept Note (PCN).

                                                                       1



                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
communities in ten districts2 in Cabo Delgado province will also benefit from rehabilitated and new
public infrastructure. New and existing women and youth socio-economic enterprises across the three
provinces will benefit from grants to develop and implement their business plans, and youth in selected
districts will be provided with skills and job placement services. Communities in targeted districts will
benefit from GBV prevention activities and strengthened GBV response services. All northern district
(56) and province (3) authorities will benefit from technical assistance and training in participatory local
development and economic enterprise development, and hands-on operational support in areas of
procurement and environmental and social risk management, as well as financial management,
monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and grievance redress.

1.2.2 Program components

The Northern Mozambique Social Cohesion Community Resilience for Jobs Program comprises the
following five (5) components as described in the table below.

                                               Table 1: Program components

    Component                                Key Sub-component
    Component 1: Strengthening               Sub-component 1.1: Mobilizing dialogue forums (US$2 million).
    Community and Government                 This sub-component will activate the NRCF to become a dynamic
    Collaboration (US$7 million)             and inclusive semi-annual northern cross-province dialogue forum,
                                             where the governors from the three provinces and government and
                                             community representatives from the districts will jointly discuss
                                             and monitor the implementation of provincial development
                                             strategies. The project will finance the cost of meetings and
                                             workshops, as well as exchanges within the region. The project will
                                             also support the development of a communication strategy to
                                             ensure that the objectives of the dialogue forums and the process
                                             of constituting them and selecting participants is clearly
                                             communicated to all stakeholders as a way of building complicity
                                             and ensuring transparency. The sub-component will also activate
                                             provincial observatories (one in each northern province) that will
                                             bring together district government and community representatives
                                             to monitor the implementation of district development strategies;
                                             and mobilize existing and new district-level Consultative Councils
                                             to facilitate regular dialogue between the districts and community
                                             groups and between different groups at the community level, by
                                             financing their operating costs and training. The Project Operations
                                             Manual will specify the level of representation and role of
                                             communities in these forums and establish protocols for
                                             transparent and accountable decision-making processes.

                                             Sub-component 1.2: Developing District-level Development Plans
                                             (US$5 million). This sub-component will finance the incorporation
                                             of climate resilience considerations into MPD’s 2025 participatory
                                             planning and budgeting tool and provide training to district,
                                             provincial, and central project teams on its use. Under the oversight
                                             of the National Directorate for Planning (DNP), the District
                                             Implementation Team (DITs), with the support of Community
                                             Facilitators (CFs), will engage with the selected localities to carry
                                             out a community mapping exercise to identify needs, and develop
                                             community projects (one per locality) that answer key needs, to be

2
    Balama, Chiúre, Muidumbe, Meluco, Mecufi, Metuge, Mocimboa da Praia, Montepuez, Namuno, and Palma.
                                                                2



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
Component                     Key Sub-component
                              financed under sub-component 3.1 within a financing envelope
                              determined by the locality’s population size. Consultative
                              committees of elected representatives of IDPs, host communities,
                              returnees, men, women, youth, and people with disabilities will
                              identify the projects. The selected projects will prioritize creating
                              jobs and facilitating engagement with the private sector and
                              address issues of accessibility, manpower, power sources, and
                              availability of local skills and services to ensure projects’ viability.
                              Each project will include an operation and maintenance (O&M)
                              plan specifying the revenue source used to sustain the investments.
                              The projects will be compiled into District-level Development
                              Plans (DLDPs) to be reviewed and approved by the District
                              Executive Committee, headed by the District Administrator, who
                              will ensure that projects reflect recorded community needs, are
                              eligible, viable, and sustainable, are aligned with the financial
                              envelope, do not have negative impacts on neighboring localities,
                              and create local jobs. The approved DLDPs will be endorsed by
                              the provincial government. The CFs will be competitively
                              recruited as volunteers, trained by the district teams, and provided
                              with stipends and communication tools to coordinate the mapping
                              exercises. The Project Operations Manual will outline transparent
                              and inclusive project selection and approval processes.
Component 2: Improving Sub-component 2.1: Supporting cash-for-work, youth upskilling,
Access      to      Economic and women and youth socio-economic enterprises (US$20
Opportunities and Jobs (US$22 million). This component will finance:
million))
                              a. Cash-for-work support to vulnerable people (US$8,000,000):
                                  This sub-component will provide cash transfers and
                                  livelihoods support to the most vulnerable households in the
                                  56 districts to mitigate welfare shocks, stabilize household
                                  consumption, and promote economic inclusion, while
                                  mitigating risks of recruitment to violent extremism. Cash
                                  transfers will also reduce people’s reliance on climate-
                                  sensitive and environmentally degrading practices, including
                                  charcoal production, wood extraction, bush burning for
                                  hunting, and unsustainable fishing, particularly in coastal and
                                  riverine districts. The design and implementation of this
                                  intervention will build on the model of the World Bank
                                  Productive Social Action Program (PASP), a package that
                                  includes a mix of public works, basic training, and economic
                                  inclusion components. The Project Operations Manual will
                                  provide adaptations to the PASP model, informed by local
                                  conflict and political economy analysis and social inclusion
                                  considerations to ensure equitable access to resources, to avoid
                                  exacerbating tensions, prioritizing women and youth, and to
                                  strengthen community resilience. This intervention will
                                  strengthen Mozambique’s social protection systems, such as
                                  targeting tools, existing registry of vulnerable families, digital
                                  payments mechanisms, and others, in consideration of the
                                  fragile context and by stabilizing incomes, the intervention will
                                  reduce pressure on natural resources and support more
                                  sustainable livelihood strategies. This sub-component will use

                                                  3



                                                                                                  Official Use Only
Component   Key Sub-component
               strategic partnerships      with    third-party   providers   for
               implementation.

            b. Youth upskilling (US$4,000,000): SICsCenters of Excellence
               (CoEs) - one in each province—such as tertiary technical
               colleges or universities, will deliver technical and vocational
               training, technology skills courses, artisanal courses,
               mentorship, and certification guidance to youth in professions
               relevant to local market demand. The SICCoEs will also
               provide training to participating youth on climate risk
               management, resilient business practices and integration of
               resilience measures into business plans. The Project
               Operations Manual will define transparent, inclusive, and
               conflict-sensitive procedures for beneficiary identification and
               selection.

            c. Support to women and youth socio-economic enterprises
               (US$8,000,000): The project will provide grants to existing
               women and youth enterprises to, inter alia, implement their
               business plans, expand operations, and generate employment
               opportunities, including for youth graduating from the
               SICCoEs. The grants will help enterprises integrate measures
               to reduce their climate risks, such as basic planning for floods,
               droughts, or other disruptions that may affect their operations.
               The grant amount will be split evenly between women
               enterprises and youth/people with disabilities enterprises. A
               grants manual will specify eligibility criteria and a
               transparent application process that mitigates risks of elite
               capture.

            Youth upskilling and support to socio-economic enterprises will be
            informed by a market needs assessment to be carried out in
            consultation with private sector actors, including from the LNG
            industry, to determine the existing and future economic
            opportunities and market access and thus ensure viability and
            sustainability of the skills provided and enterprises supported.

            Sub-component 2.2: Providing GBV and psycho-social support
            services (US$2 million). This sub-component will focus on GBV
            prevention and response through an integrated package of
            awareness raising and community engagement activities to make
            sure that trauma survivors are in a better position to participate in
            economic activities. Targeted social and behavior change
            communication campaigns on GBV, sexual and reproductive
            health, and mental health will be implemented across the three
            provinces using theater, radio, and printed materials,
            complemented by community engagement through the GALS and
            other psycho-social support programs in districts with high IDP
            populations to address underlying drivers of GBV. The project will
            strengthen existing district and community level structures to
            improve GBV prevention, referral, and response by reinforcing the
            capacity of community-based mechanisms and strengthening
            coordination and referral pathways with formal service providers
                            4



                                                                             Official Use Only
Component                        Key Sub-component
                                 to ensure timely access to medical, psycho-social, and legal
                                 support. Implementation will be carried out in close coordination
                                 with the Capacity Building for Improved GBV Response Project
                                 (P502471) to ensure alignment and leverage ongoing capacity
                                 building and system strengthening efforts at district and
                                 community levels.
Component 3: Improving           Sub-component 3.1: Providing climate resilient community
access to climate resilient      infrastructure (US$20 million). This sub-component will finance
infrastructure (US$66 million)   the design, development/rehabilitation, and supervision of the
                                 community infrastructure projects selected by the communities
                                 under sub-component 1.2, and preferably ones that enable the
                                 participation of community members in labor and monitoring, as
                                 financed under sub-component 2.1. The design of the infrastructure
                                 will be carried out by the relevant district departments with the
                                 support of the provincial Public Works Department and ANOP,
                                 while the tendering will be done by the district secretaries under
                                 the leadership of the District Permanent Secretary.

                                 Sub-component 3.2. Providing climate resilient public
                                 infrastructure (US$46 million). This sub-component will finance
                                 the construction, rehabilitation, and supervision of climate resilient
                                 public infrastructure works that were prioritized by the government
                                 under the Northern Crisis Recovery Project (NCRP, P176157) to
                                 serve IDPs in relocation sites, host communities, and returnees in
                                 ten districts in Cabo Delgado.14 The infrastructure includes
                                 administrative post headquarters offices, locality secretariat
                                 offices, primary and secondary schools, health centers, district
                                 hospitals, houses for teachers, nurses, and doctors, community
                                 markets, multipurpose social spaces, and a water supply system.
                                 The sub-component will also finance the supervision of works and
                                 assessment of damage and vulnerabilities of public infrastructure
                                 in Niassa and Nampula provinces, and the preparation of bidding
                                 documents for the works by ANOP, for financing by Phase II.
                                 ADIN, in collaboration with ANOP and the provinces, will lead
                                 the implementation of this sub-component, while ANOP will
                                 provide technical designs and quality assurance to ensure resilient
                                 construction. Works will engage community members as laborers
                                 to enhance participation, ownership, and accountability, and to
                                 provide employment. Following completion, infrastructure under
                                 this sub-component will be handed over to the respective
                                 provincial and district authorities for service delivery to local
                                 populations, with support from active World Bank operations in
                                 the north.

                                 Income generated through employment under sub-components 3.1
                                 and 3.2 is expected to reduce dependence on natural resource
                                 extraction. Wages will enable households to access more durable
                                 and climate-resilient construction materials, reducing the use of
                                 locally sourced materials and contributing to more resilient
                                 housing practices.
Component 4: Improving           This component will finance the operating costs of an ADIN-
Project Management and           housed Program Coordination Unit (PCU), Provincial Project
Coordination and Financing a     Teams (PPTs) and DITs that will coordinate and manage the
                                                 5



                                                                                                   Official Use Only
    Component                      Key Sub-component
    Learning Agenda (US$5          project from fiduciary, E&S risk management, grievance redress,
    million).                      and M&E perspectives. It will also finance the incremental
                                   operating costs of a Steering Committee (SC) and the regional and
                                   district dialogue forums and the costs of communication activities.
                                   The component will also support the development of a climate
                                   finance roadmap for MPD’s National Directorate of Climate
                                   Finance to secure climate finance for the Northern Region to
                                   further enhance community resilience. Finally, this component will
                                   finance capacity evaluations, impact assessments, perception
                                   surveys, and localized needs assessments in support of the
                                   program’s learning agenda. The component’s costs reflects these
                                   expenses and the expected elevated costs of work in remote and at-
                                   risk areas.
    Component 5: Contingent        This component will enable access to rapid financing by providing
    Emergency Response (CERC)      for a possible reallocation of uncommitted project funds in the
    (US$0)                         event of a natural disaster, either by a formal declaration of
                                   emergency by the national or provincial government or upon a
                                   formal request from the Government of Mozambique. A CERC
                                   Manual and an Emergency Action Plan will be prepared separately
                                   and approved by the World Bank, which will constitute a
                                   disbursement condition for the CERC. If this component is
                                   activated, the project will be restructured to reallocate funds, and
                                   to revise the PDO, indicators, and implementation arrangements as
                                   needed. The CERC activities will be carried out in accordance with
                                   the CERC Manual and the Emergency Action Plan.

2      OBJECTIVE OF THE SEP
The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including public
information disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle, and to ensure that
stakeholder feedback is systematically considered and integrated into program design, implementation,
and adaptive management. The SEP outlines the ways in which the ADIN will communicate with
stakeholders and includes a mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make
complaints about the program and any activities related to the program. The SEP specifically
emphasizes methods to engage groups considered most vulnerable and that are at risk of being left out
of program benefits.


3      STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS
3.1     Methodology
The following stakeholders have been identified and analyzed, taking into account their key groupings
and subgroupings, as well as considering regulatory requirements and the program's targeted area. Desk
review of diverse documents, including those of prior similar projects (P174635- Northern Mozambique
Rural Resilience Project, P176157- Northern Crisis Recovery Project (NCRP)), as well as consultation
with relevant stakeholders (details in table 6 and annex 4), was key for the development of this SEP. It
was also considered how each of the stakeholder groups will be affected by the program and what
influence they could have on the program, and this helps the process of designing an engagement
strategy, as well as prioritizing stakeholders for consultation. Based on that, developing and
implementing engagement methods that are effective and inclusive, considering the different access and
communication needs of various groups and individuals, especially those more disadvantaged or
vulnerable, was key. These stakeholders include affected parties (as defined in section 3.2), other
interested parties (as defined in section 3.3) and disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups (as
defined in section 3.4).
                                                    6



                                                                                                   Official Use Only
The table below summarizes the identified and categorized stakeholders and their level of participation
and influence in the program. This table will be updated during the implementation of the program to
ensure that no interested parties are excluded.

                                            Table 2: Stakeholders categorization

    Stakeholders that may be                    Stakeholders that take part in                Stakeholders with influence on
    affected directly or indirectly by          implementation of the program                 the implementation of the
    the program                                                                               program
    General affected population,                ADIN                                          ADIN
    internally displaced persons (IDPs)
    in Cabo Delgado, Nampula and                Provincial Program Team (PPT),                Central Government (MOPHRH,
    Niassa.                                     District Implementation Team                  MPD, Ministries of Finance,
                                                (DIT), District administrators.               Ministry of Agriculture,
    Vulnerable populations including                                                          Environment and Fisheries,
    women, female headed                        District government institution               Ministries of Health, Education,
    households, children/ child headed          (SDAE, SDPI, SDEJT, SDSMAS)3                  Gender, Child and Social
    households, youth, Persons with                                                           Protection)
    Disability (PWD), IODPs and                 CSOs, Locality Consultative
    others                                      Councils (LCC)                                NGOs, CSOs, and Associations
                                                                                              (at national and provincial
    Civil society organizations (CSOs)          Ministry of Planning and                      levels)
                                                Development (MPD), Ministry of
    Private sector, small commercial            Public Works, Housing and Water               Provincial Governments of Cabo
    farmers, subsistence farmers                Resources (MOPHRH)                            Delgado, Nampula, and Niassa

    Public servants (health, education          Provincial Government                         UN entities (World Food
    workers, public administration in           (Directorate of Agriculture,                  Program, UNICEF, UNOPS,
    general)                                    Fisheries, Public Works)                      World Health Organization, IOM
                                                                                              etc.).
    NGOs and Associations operating             Targeted Municipalities in the
    at local and provincial levels              provinces of Cabo Delgado,                    Universities     and     research
                                                Nampula and Niassa                            institutions, National Disaster
    Ministries involved (MPD                                                                  Management Institute - INGD,
    MOPHRH)                                     Contractors and service providers,            media (local, and national level).
                                                Consulting firms                              Community (community leaders,
    Provincial and District                                                                   host families).
    Government                                  Security companies

    Small scale fisherman, small scale          NGOs (especially those working
    farmers, beekeeping, milling,               on Gender Based Violence, child
    builders and small business owners          and social action, social protection
    (among IDPs and host                        reconstruction process, youth
    communities)                                empowerment, peacebuilding)

    Medical and health staff                    UN entities (UNOPS, UNICEF,
                                                WFP, IOM)


3.2      Affected parties
Affected parties include local communities, community members and other parties that may be subject
to direct impacts from the Program. Specifically, the following individuals and groups fall within this
category, as indicated in table 3 below.


3
 SDAE- District Services for Economic Activities, SDPI- District Planning and Infrastructure Services, SDEJT- District Education Services
Youth and Technology, SDSMAS- District Health, Women and Social Action Services.
                                                                   7



                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
The local communities will be directly affected by the Program through the implementation of
construction and/or repair community education and health facilities, water supply and sanitation
services, rehabilitation of local rural roads, including small bridges and culverts, construction of local
markets, among others. Therefore, the involvement of the local community is important to ensure their
effective participation in decision-making on the implementation of the Program; the decisions that
may be of interest to local communities include, but will not be limited to: recruitment of local labor,
and selection criteria; mechanisms for submitting concerns and grievances; alternative accesses in
sections of local rural roads to be rehabilitated; role of local/traditional leaders; communication with
Contractors; risks related to GBV/SEA/SH, especially due to the likely presence of private
protection/security forces at construction sites.

At this stage, the expected roles in engagement for all identified affected parties are consulted and
collaborate and/or partnerships, depending on the specific program activities being carried out.

                                    Table 3: Identified affected parties

 Affected parties          Description
 Local communities         Local communities will be directly affected by the program through the
                           implementation of component 1 and 2 activities. This includes IDPs, host
                           communities, especially in Nampula and Niassa district; communities of the 22
                           targeted districts in the provinces of Cabo Delgado, Nampula, and Niassa, and more
                           specifically the 400 communities covering 12,000 households.

 Community-based           The participation of OCBs will be very important to stimulate members of these
 organizations (OCBs       organizations in discussions and decision making on the implementation of the
                           program throughout its life cycle, especially under component 1 and 2 activities.
                           The OCBs to be affected include the following: Agricultural associations,
                           sustainable management of natural resources (CGRN), savings and revolving credit
                           groups (PCR), Community Fisheries Councils (CCPs), aquaculture associations,
                           Locality Consultative Councils (LCC),
 Non –Governmental         The participation of local, national and international non-governmental
 Organizations (NGOs)      organizations (NGOs) will be important for the implementation of the stakeholder
                           engagement plan throughout the program's life cycle, in relation to activities under
                           component 1, 2 and 3. The NGOs to be affected include the following: all those
                           working directly with the IDPs, REDE of Community Management of Natural
                           Resources (REDE-GCRN), UNICEF, Mozambican Rural Women's Movement
                           (MMMR).
 Local Government          Provincial, district and local government offices are important and affected by the
                           program under components 1, 2 and 3. It includes the Provincial Directorate of
                           Public Works (DPOP), Agriculture and Fisheries (DPAP), Economic Activities,
                           Environment (DPAE), Land and Territorial Planning (DPTOT), Health and Social
                           Action (DPSAS), Education and Human Development (DPEDH), Fisheries
                           Development Delegation, and Disaster Management, District Services for
                           Economic Activities (SDAE), Planning and Infrastructure (SDPI), Health and
                           Social Action (SDSAS), Education, Youth and Technology (SDEJT).
 Interested Institutions   The institutionally affected stakeholders of the program are mainly the following:
                           MOPHRH, MPD, Ministries of Finance, Ministry of Agriculture, Environment and
                           Fisheries, Ministries of Health, Education, Gender, Child and Social Protection,
                           provincial, district level and including the Project Coordination Units (PCU). This
                           group includes the institutions that will supervise the program activities within their
                           areas of responsibility, such as Environmental Quality Agency (AQUA), National
                           Directorate for the Promotion of Integrated Development, Climate Change Unit-
                           UMC.
 Local Private Sector      The Program will support community‑driven investments and small‑scale
                           infrastructure that can influence access to markets, natural resources, productive
                           assets, and local economic opportunities. As such, local private sector and small
                           business owners may experience both positive impacts (improved infrastructure,
                           services, and local economic linkages) and temporary adverse impacts (such as
                                                       8



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
 Affected parties           Description
                            localized construction‑related disruptions or changes in resource use), requiring
                            targeted engagement and mitigation measures in line with ESF requirements.


3.3   Other interested parties
The programs’ stakeholders also include parties other than the directly affected communities, including,
but not limited to, the following described in table 4 below. The government institutions (Ministry of
Economy and Ministry of Finance, ADIN, MAAP, MINEDH, MOPHRH, among others) at both the
central and local levels, as well as international organizations, have an important role within the program
area, which includes ensuring the provision of basic services such as education, health, housing, and
water. These institutions/organizations will be affected and have interest in the program, as their related
infrastructures and services will be intervened through program implementation. Their
interest/intervention will be through supervising the activities within their areas of responsibility and
coordinating certain activities along with the PPT and DIT. Through component 1.3, local government
institutions will receive capacity building to plan climate-resilient infrastructures to respond to
community needs. Their participation and interest are linked to the training in the participatory planning
and monitoring process under component 2.1.

At this stage, the expected roles in engagement for all identified other interested parties are consulted
and collaborate and/or partnerships, depending on the specific program activities being carried out.


                                 Table 4: Other interested parties identified

 Other Interested            Description
 Parties
 Ministry of Economy,        These ministries are responsible for managing and establishing the government's
 and Ministry of Finance     long-term financial strategy, as well as for the supervision and management of the
                             financial resources of large investments in the country.
 Northern Development        Responsible for the coordination, articulation and management of programs to
 Agency (ADIN)               boost the integrated socioeconomic development of the North region, in the
                             provinces of Nampula, Niassa and Cabo Delgado. ADIN is also responsible for
                             managing multisectoral programs for development, business promotion,
                             investment and employment, mobilization of internal and external resources to
                             ensure the development of the northern part of the country in the medium and long
                             term.
 Ministry of Agriculture,    Responsible for allocating land to IDPs, management of agriculture and fisheries
 Environment and             sectors, as well as ensuring the implementation of the environmental policy,
 Fisheries (MAAP)            including monitoring and auditing of activities/projects in relation to the
                             environmental management aspects, through the Environmental Quality Agency
                             (AQUA).
 Other sectors of the        Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water Resources (MOPHRH), the
 ministries                  Ministry of Health (MISAU), Ministry of Defense (MD), the Ministry of the
                             Interior (MI), Ministry of Labor, Gender, and Social Action (MTGAS); Ministry
                             of Education and Culture (MEC), National Institute for Social Assistance (INAS),
                             and the National Institute for Disaster Management (INGD). It is also included in
                             this group the Provincial Directorate of Public Works (DPOP), Agriculture and
                             Fisheries (DPAP), Economic Activities, Environment (DPAE), Land and
                             Territorial Planning (DPTOT), Health and Social Action (DPSAS), Education and
                             Human Development (DPEDH), Fisheries Development Delegation, and Disaster
                             Management, the District Services for Economic Activities (SDAE), Planning and
                             Infrastructure (SDPI), Health and Social Action (SDSAS), Education, Youth and
                             Technology (SDEJT).
 United Nations              World Food Program (WFP), International Organization for Migration (IOM),
 organizations               United Nations Children's Organization (UNICEF), World Health Organization


                                                      9



                                                                                                           Official Use Only
 Other Interested            Description
 Parties
                             (WHO), WaterAid, United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), Food
                             and Agriculture Organization (FAO).


3.4   Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups
Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups, include those who may be more likely to be adversely
affected by the program impacts and/or more limited than others in their ability to take advantage of a
program’s benefits. Such an individual/group is also more likely to be excluded from/unable to
participate fully in the mainstream consultation process and as such may require specific measures
and/or assistance to do so. Within the Program, the vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include,
but are not limited to, the following described in table 5 below.

As per the Mozambique Constitution (articles 35, 37, 125), discrimination against Persons with
Disabilities (PWD) is prohibited, their rights are guaranteed, and special protection, rehabilitation, and
social integration are offered. The National Action Plan for Disability (PNAD-2012) and the Strategy
for Inclusive Education and Development of Children with Disabilities (2020-2029) operationalize the
requirements from the Constitution. The Ministry of Labor, Gender and Social Action (MTGAS) and
the National Institute for Social Assistance (INAS) are the key government entities for the
implementation of actions to protect the PWD, while the Forum of Mozambican Associations of
Disabled People (FAMOD) plays a crucial role in addressing discrimination and barriers to accessing
public services. Activities of these institutions should be well coordinated with the program
implementers (at the central, provincial, and district levels), including with ADIN, to ensure that
consultation activities are aligned to avoid pressing the same communities and create consultation
fatigue.

                    Table 5: Identified disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups

 Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or          Description                  Possible Barriers they may
 Groups                                                                        Encounter in Accessing
                                                                               Information
 Internal displaced people (IDPs).                These groups or              Language barriers, as most
 Individuals and families affected by HIV.        individuals may be           of them speak one language
 Elders.                                          potentially                  (local language).
 People with chronic medical conditions.          disproportionally affected   They may feel inhibited due
 Young people aged 18 to 35 who have not          and less able to benefit     to their status in the
 attended school.                                 from opportunities offered   community, and as such are
 People with reduced mobility of any nature       by the program due to        not always able to freely
 regardless of whether they are under permanent   specific difficulties to     express their concerns and
 care or self-cared.                              access and/or understand     interests about the program.
 People with vision/hearing impairment,           information about the        Lack of transportation to the
 cognitive disabilities.                          program and its              events.
 Single parent headed households, male and        environmental and social     Accessibility of venues.
 female.                                          impacts and mitigation       Their reduced mobility.
 Female heads of low-income household or with     strategies.                  Lack of understanding of a
 young children (under 5 years).                                               consultation process.
 Economically marginalized and disadvantaged                                   Materials provided in
 groups.                                                                       formats that are not
 Communities in remote and inaccessible areas                                  formatted for screen readers,
 with low communication.                                                       material in small font sizes.
                                                                               Use of long sentences that
                                                                               makes information difficult
                                                                               to process.




                                                     10



                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the program will be further confirmed and
consulted through dedicated means, as appropriate. Description of the methods of engagement that will
be undertaken by the programt is provided in the following sections.


4     STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM
4.1   Summary of stakeholder engagement undertaken during program preparation

During program preparation, the following public consultation meetings were conducted, as described
in the table below, and in Annex 4.




                                                 11



                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                    Table 6: List of stakeholders’ engagement done during program preparation

                                               Number of
#     Location       Stakeholders             Participants           Date                          Summary of Key Issues Discussed
                                             M          W
1   Nampula      District Government -    42        8            17/02/2026     1.   The program that aims to strengthen stability and accelerate
                 Ribaue, Memba,                                                      development in the province of Nampula was socialized, with an
                 Mecuburi, Malema,                                                   investment of US$250 million, the initiative proposes long-term
                 Muecate and Erati                                                   interventions aimed at promoting social cohesion, preventing
                                                                                     conflicts and improving essential infrastructure.
                                                                                2.   During the socialization of the program, it was emphasized that the
                                                                                     districts should take an active role at all stages of the program cycle,
                                                                                     with a view to ensuring their institutional ownership and
                                                                                     sustainability.
                                                                                3.   As part of the process of assessing the initial conditions for the start
                                                                                     of the program, ADIN aims to promote the approximation between
                                                                                     local development actors and potential beneficiaries, aligning them
                                                                                     with the new approach introduced by the MozCommunity Program.
                                                                                4.   The districts are expected to play a central role in conducting the
                                                                                     planning processes from the locality level to the district level, and it
                                                                                     is recognized that the district planning technical councils are active
                                                                                     and have relevant experience on the applicable procedures.
                                                                                5.   At the end of the meeting with the district governments, a form was
                                                                                     shared to collect information on the current state of the communities
                                                                                     and their socio-economic infrastructures, and it is hoped that all
                                                                                     stakeholders will feel involved, engaged and committed to the
                                                                                     implementation of the Program.
2                Civil Society            41        23           18/02/2026     1.   It is expected that the districts will play a fundamental role in the
                 Organizations                                                       Program, by conducting the processes from the level of the locality
                                                                                     to the district level, based on the assumption that the Technical
                                                                                     Councils of District Planning are active and have consolidated
                                                                                     experience in the procedures, namely:
                                                                                     • Identification of the problems and challenges of the
                                                                                           communities.
                                                                                     • Identification of priority locations for intervention.
                                                                                     • Sharing good practice experiences from previous district
                                                                                           planning processes, as well as lessons learned.

                                                                       12



                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                                Number of
#     Location        Stakeholders             Participants       Date                        Summary of Key Issues Discussed
                                              M          W
                                                                                •    Definition of mechanisms for participatory intervention of the
                                                                                     different actors in the process of selecting beneficiaries.
3                Private Sector          74          23       18/02/2026   1.   The participation of the private sector in the promotion of
                                                                                employment and employability of young people was discussed,
                                                                                necessarily influencing the mentality of young people, that is, the
                                                                                way they position themselves and prepare themselves for the labor
                                                                                market.
                                                                           2.   It was recognized that the employability challenges in Mozambique
                                                                                are interconnected and require a systemic approach: it is not only
                                                                                about creating jobs, but also about strengthening and
                                                                                institutionalizing collaboration platforms that promote applied
                                                                                innovation, consolidate monitoring mechanisms and strengthen
                                                                                shared responsibility between the State, training institutions and the
                                                                                private sector. Also mentioned the need to provide more
                                                                                opportunities to local companies rather than bringing companies
                                                                                from Maputo or other provinces.
                                                                           3.   The strategy of this Incubation Model is essentially focused on
                                                                                changing the mentality of young people, through critical reflection,
                                                                                analysis of opportunities and recognition of local potential as a basis
                                                                                for building sustainable economic trajectories. Challenge raised on
                                                                                lack of access to finance following incubation.
                                                                           4.   By acting simultaneously with young entrepreneurs and established
                                                                                companies, it becomes possible to create a resilient employability
                                                                                ecosystem, capable of valuing local talent and generating lasting
                                                                                impact in rural and peri-urban communities in Northern
                                                                                Mozambique.
4   Niassa       Provincial Government                                     1.   The Governor presented the potential of Niassa, having highlighted
                                                                                agriculture as a priority of the province, such as the production of
                                                                                beans, macadamia, strawberries and fruit trees.
                                                                                     He presented the challenges, having highlighted the economic
                                                                                     infrastructures, such as the roads, of the existing 7729Km, only
                                                                                     900Km are paved.
                                                                           2.   He requested the sharing of the concept note of the Program, for
                                                                                better appropriation.

                                                                   13



                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                              Number of
#   Location       Stakeholders              Participants       Date                       Summary of Key Issues Discussed
                                            M          W
                                                                         3.   He suggested that the management of the funds be the responsibility
                                                                              of ADIN, since many projects subcontract to third parties and a large
                                                                              part of the funds are used for administrative costs to the detriment
                                                                              of the beneficiaries (Population).
                                                                         4.   He asked about the overall value of the program (how much value
                                                                              will the Province of Niassa benefit?)
                                                                         5.   He suggested that they prioritize the Province of Niassa in the
                                                                              implementation of infrastructure projects, since the distances
                                                                              between the districts are long and the access roads are degraded.
                                                                         6.   He suggested reducing training costs for the construction or
                                                                              rehabilitation of economic and social infrastructure
                                                                         7.   The Provincial Director of Youth and Sports suggested the inclusion
                                                                              of the construction of sports infrastructures at the level of the
                                                                              Province of Niassa, and the inclusion of aspects related to economic
                                                                              empowerment for Youth, such as allocation of self-employment kits
                                                                              for Youth
                                                                         8.   The Director of the Office of H.E. Governor asked about aspects of
                                                                              environmental safeguards. (What aspects of environmental
                                                                              safeguards will the project consider?)
5              District Government -   11          5        19/02/2026   1.   The Permanent Secretaries and District Directors were unanimous
               Nipepe, Mecula and                                             in stating that the districts have sufficient Human Resources and
               Marrupa                                                        experience to manage funds, and competitions if the plans are clear
                                                                              and flexible. Some Districts highlighted the experience they had
                                                                              with the MOZNORTE Project, which was implemented in the same
                                                                              way.
                                                                         2.   About improving access to basic services and resilient
                                                                              infrastructure, they suggested that the Project look at the
                                                                              rehabilitation of roads and bridges, as access roads are degraded in
                                                                              all districts of Niassa Province.
                                                                         3.   Regarding the social cohesion component, the SPDs and DDs
                                                                              suggested reducing the number of Members of the Associations that
                                                                              will be covered from 30 Members to 20 or 15, since in Niassa there
                                                                              are no associations composed of 30 Members. They also suggested
                                                                              that this figure should consider local conditions.

                                                                 14



                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                        Number of
#   Location        Stakeholders       Participants       Date                       Summary of Key Issues Discussed
                                      M          W
6              Civil Society       44        22       20/02/2026   1.  All participants were unanimous in stating that the project reflects
               Organizations                                           the needs of the Province and the Northern Region.
                                                                   2. For the success of the project there is a need to clarify the selection
                                                                       criterion of the companies (Associations, cooperatives and private)
                                                                       to be covered.
                                                                   3. Involvement of the different actors (Private Sector, CSOs,
                                                                       community leaders).
                                                                   4. Decentralization in the implementation of the Project at all levels
                                                                       (From the Province to the Locality).
                                                                   5. Clarity and transparency in the management of project funds.
                                                                   6. Dissemination of the project at all levels (Province, District,
                                                                       Administrative Post to the Locality).
                                                                   7. Creation of synergies between the different actors (Government,
                                                                       Civil Society, Private and the Community);
                                                                   8. Build on the successful implementation experiences of previous
                                                                       projects (LoCAL, Moz Norte).
                                                                   9. Transparency of criteria in the selection of beneficiaries.
                                                                   10. Transparency of the tenders to be launched.
                                                                   11. Training of local health professionals so that they can ensure
                                                                       continuous psychosocial support in the various components.
                                                                   12. Training of activists who can ensure continuity of psychosocial
                                                                       support and who speak the local language.
                                                                   13. Creation of quotas to serve people with disabilities.
                                                                   14. Ensuring advisory boards are inclusive.
                                                                   15. Ensure the involvement of CSOs in the implementation and
                                                                       monitoring of projects through outsourcing.
                                                                   16. Involve CSOs to support beneficiaries at different stages in project
                                                                       implementation from the preparation of Projects, Business Plans,
                                                                       capacity building of aspects related to social cohesion.
                                                                   17. Engage CSOs to support the promotion of spaces for dialogue
                                                                       between Communities, Government and the Private Sector.
7              Private Sector      35        10       20/02/2026   1. The Private Sector suggests that consultations for the
                                                                       implementation of the project should also be carried out in the
                                                                       communities.

                                                           15



                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                           Number of
#     Location       Stakeholders         Participants       Date                       Summary of Key Issues Discussed
                                         M          W
                                                                      2.   Suggest clarifying the role of the Private Sector in project
                                                                           implementation.
                                                                      3.   The private sector must be integrated into local advisory councils.
                                                                      4.   The Private Sector Suggests Tax Reform for Business Improvement
                                                                      5.   Youth incubators should be built within Private Sector farms, if
                                                                           conditions are created for funding Young People after incubation.
                                                                      6.   They suggest the need to structure the market by linking to an
                                                                           aggregator
                                                                      7.   The private sector suggests improving access routes to allow the
                                                                           flow of products.
                                                                      8.   It suggests the need to support small entrepreneurs to register their
                                                                           business
8   Pemba        Provincial Government                   25/02/2026   1.   During the debriefing with His Excellency the Governor, the main
                                                                           points related to the implementation of the Project and the strategic
                                                                           guidelines for its operationalization were highlighted:
                                                                      2.   The need for the appointment of a focal point at the provincial level
                                                                           to facilitate institutional coordination and communication was
                                                                           identified.
                                                                      3.   It was recommended that the inclusion of local ombudsmen who
                                                                           speak the local languages ensure greater effectiveness in
                                                                           communication and community participation.
                                                                      4.   The urgency in the implementation of the project was underlined,
                                                                           given the existing local needs.
                                                                      5.   ADIN should take over the coordination of the project in the
                                                                           northern region and MOPH will provide support in the infrastructure
                                                                           component.
                                                                      6.   Aspects that need clarification were identified, noting that Cabo
                                                                           Delgado does not intend to exclude any entity, prioritizing only
                                                                           quality criteria.
                                                                      7.   The private sector must be expanded and integrated, without
                                                                           excluding other actors, and a specific mechanism must be put in
                                                                           place to ensure its effective participation.
                                                                      8.   The World Bank has proposed holding an integration workshop,
                                                                           involving the three provinces covered, with the aim of establishing
                                                                           a common vision, by the month of May.
                                                              16



                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                               Number of
#    Location       Stakeholders              Participants       Date                        Summary of Key Issues Discussed
                                             M          W
                                                                          9.   Governor noted that the private sector must be expanded and
                                                                               integrated, without excluding other actors, and a specific mechanism
                                                                               must be put in place to ensure its effective participation
9               District Government -   87          13       24/02/2026   1.   The Permanent Secretaries questioned whether there are similarities
                Pemba, Ancuabe,                                                between the Program and the MozNorte Project, stressing that the
                Balama, Chiure, Ibo,                                           districts covered show human resource capacity for project
                Macomia, Mecufi,                                               management.
                Meluco, Metuge,                                           2.   They reiterated the need for the project to benefit all districts of the
                Mocimboa da Praia,                                             province, arguing that there should be no exclusions justified by
                Montepuez, Mueda,                                              insecurity.
                Muidumbe, Namuno,                                         3.   They underlined that coordination should be ensured by ADIN,
                Nangade, Palma and                                             while the planning and management of the program should be
                Quissanga                                                      conducted at district level, to strengthen local autonomy and respect
                                                                               the principles of decentralization.
                                                                          4.   They suggested holding planning meetings with the districts and,
                                                                               prior to implementation, specific meetings with the Permanent
                                                                               Secretaries and the Finance and Procurement sectors.
                                                                          5.   They stressed that the programs or projects must be aligned with the
                                                                               priorities defined by the districts.
                                                                          6.   The SPF reported that there is human resource capacity in the
                                                                               districts, although challenges remain related to the mobility of
                                                                               technicians, which can reduce the installed capacity. Thus, he
                                                                               proposed that the management of funds be ensured at the provincial
                                                                               level, with integration of district governments, and a gradual
                                                                               decentralization according to local capacities.
10              Civil Society           29          15       24/02/2026   1.   Projects must be implemented in a direct and dynamic manner,
                Organizations                                                  considering that, despite the frequent consultation and training, there
                                                                               is a slowness in the implementation phase.
                                                                          2.   It is recommended that consultations be maintained, but the
                                                                               execution of activities must be ensured by local organizations that
                                                                               have in-depth knowledge of the communities.
                                                                          3.   The coordination of the Program must be local, through ADIN, and
                                                                               civil society organizations must be integrated in the implementation
                                                                               of the projects.

                                                                  17



                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                Number of
#   Location   Stakeholders    Participants   Date                      Summary of Key Issues Discussed
                              M          W
                                                     4.   The integration of Community-Based Organizations in the funding
                                                          opportunities made available by the Program must be ensured.
                                                     5.   It is observed that a significant part of the organizations operating in
                                                          the province are not formally registered, although they have the
                                                          structure and capacity for financing. In this regard, it is important to
                                                          create opportunities for institutional strengthening, including
                                                          support for legalization.
                                                     6.   It is necessary to analyze the negative aspects, verified in the
                                                          MozNorte project, to avoid their recurrence, as well as to identify
                                                          and reinforce the positive aspects by integrating them into the Moz
                                                          Communities Program.
                                                     7.   The program must rescue and strengthen spaces for dialogue and
                                                          community planning, promoting inclusive participation.
                                                     8.   It is recommended to avoid the dispersion of resources, considering
                                                          the size of the project and the number of communities covered, to
                                                          ensure more significant gains and visible impacts.
                                                     9.   Priority should be given to projects with potential for economic
                                                          return, considering the challenges associated with the rural exodus.




                                               18



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                         Number of
#    Location        Stakeholders       Participants       Date                       Summary of Key Issues Discussed
                                       M          W
11              Private Sector      23        12       24/02/2026   1.   They praised the inclusion of young people as an integral part of the
                                                                         Program's target group.
                                                                    2.   They said that, sometimes, the criteria for access to financing are
                                                                         excessively strict, citing as an example the required contributions,
                                                                         which force entrepreneurs to resort to credit.
                                                                    3.   They pointed out that although the World Bank imposes strict
                                                                         criteria for applying for financing, delays in the disbursement of
                                                                         funds have been observed.
                                                                    4.   They highlighted that challenges persist in hiring local personnel,
                                                                         since, in many cases, candidates do not meet the minimum
                                                                         requirements required.
                                                                    5.   Suggest the integration of young people trained in internship
                                                                         programs, such as Moz Youth, with a view to acquiring professional
                                                                         experience and reducing the number of professionals recruited
                                                                         outside Cabo Delgado province;




                                                            19



                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
4.2   Summary of program stakeholder needs and methods, tools and techniques for stakeholder
      engagement


The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) outlines the engagement process, methods, including
sequencing, topics of consultations and target stakeholders. The World Bank and the Borrower
(MPD/MOPHRH) do not tolerate reprisals and retaliation against program stakeholders who share their
views about Bank-financed projects.
The process of documenting feedback and acting as part of stakeholder engagement should be a
continuous requirement to ensure meaningful consultation and program sustainability. As such, the
Project Coordination Unit (PCU), in collaboration with the PPT and DIT, should maintain a documented
record of stakeholder engagement activities, which should be published in a timely and accessible
manner, considering the methods indicated in table 7 and considering local languages. The
documentation should include at least the participant profile, information disclosed, summary of
feedback, and management response. The acting-upon process should consider adapting program
design and implementation arrangements in case the feedback received highlights significant
environmental or social risks; the SEP should also be updated to reflect the feedback received,
particularly regarding how future engagement will be conducted; if the feedback identifies site-specific
risks, its incorporation into mitigation measures will require updating the ESMP; more importantly,
communicating back to the stakeholders on how their input/feedback influenced the final decisions is
indispensable. Some of the tools for documentation include the following: (i) stakeholder engagement
log/database; (ii) grievance mechanism (GM); (iii) minutes of meetings and attendance list; (iv)
feedback report.

The stakeholder’s engagement as part of District Local Development Planning (DLDP) cycles is a
participatory, bottom-up approach involving local consultative councils (LCCs), civil society, and
traditional leaders to identify community needs. The key phases of the engagement under the DLDP
include community consultation, prioritization, and planning, aimed at sustainable development and
climate resilience. The LCCs are the primary link between the local government and communities,
comprising community leaders, youth, women, and various social groups to define essential
infrastructure needs and public services. As the program (under components 2.1 and 2.2) will finance
the rolling out of participatory planning tools, as well as the rehabilitation and development of basic
services and community infrastructures, the community engagement should be integrated, avoiding
multiple discussions with the same community members for the same goal. The role of the PPT and
DIT is essential to materialize this approach.




                                                  20



                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                 Table 7: Summary of program stakeholder needs and methods, tools and techniques for stakeholder engagement

 Program stage            Target stakeholders               Topic of consultation              Method used                  Language needs4              Responsibilities          Frequency/Timeline
                                                            / message

 Program design           Institutional                     SEP and ESCP                       Public consultation          Portuguese                   PCU environment and       Before commencement of
                          (Government                                                          meetings                                                  social risk management    activities
                          institutions, local                                                                                                            team
                          authorities, local
                          NGOs,
                          implementation
                          partners, donors,
                          Public (the public in
                          general).

                          Public in general,                ESMF/ESIAs/ESMPs/                  Public consultation          Portuguese, and              ADIN                      Before commencement of
                          local authorities, local          RAPs, the GRM;                     meetings, formal             summaries                                              respective activities
                          and international                 Social Assessment                  meetings, one-on-            translated into
                          NGOs,                             (SA), and other E&S                one interviews, e-           local languages
                          implementation                    instruments.                       mail, website,               such as
                          partners, donors.                                                    social media;                Emakhuwa,
                                                                                                                            Ciyawo, Elomwe

 Program                  Potential                         Implementation of                  Community                    Portuguese, and              ADIN, Provincial          During preparation of
 Implementation           beneficiaries, local              ESIAs/ ESMPs for                   meetings, District           summaries                    Project Team (PPT) and    instruments.
                          authorities, and                  sub-projects                       notice boards,               translated into              District Implementation
                          general public.                                                      social media,                local languages              Team (DIT)                Before commencement of
                                                                                               radio, SMS,                  such as                                                activities in sub-projects that
                                                                                               website.                     Emakhuwa,                                              require these specific
                                                                                                                            Ciyawo, Elomwe                                         instruments

                                                                                                                                                                                   Minimum on a quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                   basis


4 In Cabo Delgado Emakhuwa is language spoken by 67% of the population, while Portuguese is spoken by 6% of the population
In Niassa province Emakhuwa is spoken by 42% of the population, Ciyawo (Yao) by 31%, while Portuguese is spoken by 9% of the population.
In Nampula Emakhuwa is the dominant language, spoken by the vast majority of the population, followed by Elomwe, and Portuguese is spoken by less than 3% of the population.
                                                                                                                  21



                                                                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
Program stage   Target stakeholders    Topic of consultation   Method used         Language needs4   Responsibilities          Frequency/Timeline
                                       / message

                Potential                                      Community notice,   Local languages   District Implementation   During preparation of
                beneficiaries, Local                           boards, radio       such as           Team (DIT), CSOs,         instruments.
                NGOs, CSOs and                                                     Emakhuwa,         NGOs
                general public.                                                    Ciyawo, Elomwe                              Before commencement of
                                                                                                                               activities in sub-projects that
                                                                                                                               require these specific
                                                                                                                               instruments

                                                                                                                               Minimum on a quarterly
                                                                                                                               basis




                                                                             22



                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
4.3   Proposed strategy to incorporate the views of vulnerable groups


The program will seek the views of Internal displaced people (IDPs); Individuals and families affected
by HIV. Elders; People with chronic medical conditions; Young people aged 18 to 35 who have not
attended school; People with reduced mobility of any nature regardless of if under permanent care or
self-cared; people with vision/hearing impairment, cognitive disabilities. Single parent headed
households, male and female; Female heads of low-income household or with young children (under 5
years); Economically marginalized and disadvantaged groups; Communities in remote and inaccessible
areas with low communication, through the following methods described in table below.


                Table 8: Vulnerable groups and proposed techniques for consultation

 Vulnerable Group               Proposed technique for consultation

 IDPs and host communities      Information on consultations should be disseminated through
                                community radio and other channels available at local level. The
                                meetings will be held in host communities with the presence of
                                translators with knowledge of local languages.

 Elderly people, disabled,      The District Implementation Team (DIT) will provide
 individuals and families       transportation to consultation facilities. In addition, meeting
 affected by HIV                locations will be selected to ensure universal access for people with
                                disabilities. DIT will ensure that elderly people, disable people and
                                people with chronic disease are well represented by their
                                parents/family or other.

 Female heads of low-income     Specific locations and times will be identified depending on the
 household                      availability of this group since they may have various
                                occupations/activities during the day that make it difficult to
                                participate in meetings.

 People with reduced            Provide information in accessible formats, like braille, large print;
 mobility, visual /hearing      offer multiple forms of communication, such as text captioning or
 impairment                     signed videos, text captioning for hearing impaired, online materials
                                for people who use assistive technology.

 Women and children             Community meetings will be held with specific groups of women
                                and children (focus groups). Communities’ leaders are key to
                                encouraging these groups. One-on-one meetings will be organized,
                                according to the situation.
                                In addition, ensure community engagement teams are gender
                                balanced and promote women's leadership within them, design
                                online and face-to-face surveys and other engagement activities so
                                that women in unpaid care work can participate in the engagement
                                teams. Consultations with young women in this group should be
                                conducted independently, in safe and confidential spaces, and with
                                trained female




                                                 23



                                                                                                   Official Use Only
    Young people aged 18 to 35   Location sketches, physical models, and film presentations may be
    who have not attended        useful to communicate relevant information.
    school


All technical teams involved in the consultation will ensure that vulnerable groups are participating in
consultative processes and that their voices are not ignored. This may require specific meetings with
vulnerable groups in addition to general community consultations. In general, women may be more
outspoken in women-only consultation meetings than in general community meetings. Similarly,
separate meetings may be held with IDPs and host communities, should it be necessary. Further, it is
important to rely on other consultation methods as well, which do not require physical participation in
meetings, such as social media and radio broadcasting, to ensure that groups that cannot physically be
present at meetings can participate. A social assessment three months after program effectiveness will
investigate further specific needs of vulnerable groups during Program implementation, and the SEP
will be updated as the results of the assessment are received. A GM will be implemented in a way that
all groups identified as vulnerable have access to information and can submit their grievances and
receive feedback as prescribed.


5      RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTING STAKEHOLDER
       ENGAGEMENT
5.1     Implementation arrangements and resources

The overall responsibility for SEP implementation lies with the Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
housed in ADIN. The implementation of the SEP will be conducted in strict coordination with the
Provincial Project Team (PPT), and District Implementation Team (DIT

The program’s stakeholder engagement implementation arrangements are as follows:
   • The Program Coordination Unit (PCU) will include 1 full-time Environmental Health and
       Safety Specialist; 1 full-time Social Specialist; 1 full-time GBV Specialist; and 1 full-time
       Security Officer, responsible for oversight, reporting, and SEP implementation. In addition,
       there will be provincial level Environment, Social/GBV and OHS officers in Nampula and
       Niassa and district level GRM focal points that will support day-to-day implementation.

The stakeholder engagement activities will be documented in a transparent, accessible, and timely
manner to ensure that engagements are meaningful and that feedback influences program decisions.
Documentation should be maintained by the Borrower throughout the program life cycle and included
as part of the environmental and social assessment. As indicated in the Environmental and Social
Standard 10 (ESS10) guidance note, stakeholders’ activities documentation should include, among
others, the following:
    • Date and location of each meeting or engagement, along with a copy of the notifications sent
         to stakeholders.
    • The objective of the engagement (e.g., to inform about program plans, or to gather views on
         environmental/social risks).
    • The form of engagement used (e.g., town halls, focus groups, written consultations, one-on-one
         interviews).
    • The number and categories of stakeholders involved (e.g., community members, local
         authorities, NGOs), with particular attention to identifying vulnerable or disadvantaged groups.
    • A list of the specific program documents or information disclosed to participants.
    • A summary of the main points, concerns, and questions raised by stakeholders.

                                                   24



                                                                                                    Official Use Only
    •   A summary of how stakeholder concerns were responded to, taken into account, or the reasons
        why they were not.
    •   Clear identification of issues requiring follow-up actions and how stakeholders are informed of
        decisions.

SEP implementation resources will be aligned with commitments set out in the ESCP. The budget
estimate for the implementation of SEP is USD 1.595.400,000. It should be noted that budgets for SEP
implementation in Northern Provinces of Mozambique tend to be higher than southern/central
Mozambique due to security constraints and limited access; dispersed rural populations; presence of
IDPs and host communities; need for continuous engagement, not just periodic consultations; and
higher transport and logistics costs. The budget breakdown is described in the table below.

                               Table 9: Budget for the implementation of SEP

Budget categories                                 Quantity        Unit costs   Years Total costs

1. Estimated Staff salaries and related expenses

Salary for Social Specialist                      96 months       4.500,00     8       432.000,00

Travel/transport costs for staff                  Lumpsum                              30.000,00

Per diem for staff                                Lumpsum                              20.000,00

Grievance Mechanism Focal Points                  96 months       2.800,00     8       268.800,00

2. Consultations/ Participatory Planning, Decision-Making Meetings

                                                                               First
                                                  3 meetings      2.000,00
Program launch meetings                                                        year    6.000,00

Organization of focus groups                      1 quarterly     500,00       8       16.000,00

3. Communication campaigns

Radio, Posters, Theater, Comic books, Social
                                                  8               40,000       8
Media                                                                                  320.000,00

4. Trainings

Training on social/environmental issues for
                                                  1/province/year 2.000,00     8
PCU, PPT, DIT and contractor staff                                                     48.000,00

Training on Gender-Based Violence (GBV) for
                                            1/province/year 2.000,00           8
PCU, PPT, DIT and contractor staff                                                     48.000,00

5. Beneficiary surveys

Mid-program perception survey                     1               50.000,00    1       50.000,00

End-of-program perception survey                  1               50.000,00    1       50.000,00

6. Grievance Mechanism

Training of GM committees                         1               2.000,00     8       16.000,00

Suggestion boxes in villages                      Lumpsum                              12.000,00

                                                      25



                                                                                                    Official Use Only
Budget categories                                 Quantity         Unit costs    Years Total costs

GM communication materials                        Lumpsum                                 80.000,00

                                                  1/province/mon
                                                                 500,00          8
Grievance investigations/site visits              th                                      144.000,00

GM Information System (setting up or
                                                  Lumpsum
maintenance)                                                                              40.000,00

                                                  5% of the subtotal for GM
Other GM Logistical Costs                         management                              14.600,00

TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET:                                                      1.595.400,00


6     GRIEVANCE MECHANISM
A Grievance Mechanism is a system that allows not only grievances, but also queries, suggestions,
positive feedback, and concerns of program-affected parties related to the environmental and social
performance of the program to be submitted and responded to in a timely manner.

The GM should work within existing legal and cultural frameworks, providing an additional opportunity
to resolve grievances at the local, program level. The key objectives of the GM are: (i) record, categorize
and prioritize the grievances; (ii) settle the grievances via consultation with all stakeholders (and inform
those stakeholders of the solutions); and (iii) forward any unresolved cases to the relevant authority.

In principle, the traditional and community-based mechanisms should be considered as the first tier for
dispute resolution before the program Grievance Mechanisms (GM). As such, the existing formal or
informal mechanisms should be supplemented with program GM procedures to resolve grievances
early, efficiently, and at no cost to the complainant. The traditional, local, or customary dispute
resolution mechanisms are generally composed of elders, community councils, and leaders, which is
what the program GM also considers as the principles of accessibility, cultural appropriateness, no-
retaliation, confidentiality and inclusivity, and respect for human rights, which are integrated.

The program Grievance Mechanism (GM) described below as part of this SEP provides an accessible,
timely, and fair resolution of grievances for program-affected parties. If a grievance is not resolved to
the satisfaction of the complainant at the program level, they have several escalation options before
resorting to the judiciary. However, it is understood that not all grievances will be resolved to the
complainant's satisfaction on the first attempt. If the grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of the
complainant at the program level, the complainant has the following escalation options before resorting
to the judiciary: (i) after submitting the grievance to the program GM focal point, contractors, site
engineers, or local community representatives; (ii) if not satisfied, the complainant can escalate to the
Project Coordination Unit (PCU), and the grievance will have the intervention of the
environmental/social specialists; (iii) the Project Steering Committee can also review the decision; (iv)
and if the program-level GM fails to resolve the grievance, it can be escalated to the (v) World Bank
directly,     through      the     World       Bank       Grievance       Redress      Service      (GRS)-
http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service

6.1   Description of Grievance Mechanism (GM)

The GM implementation structure will be as follows: The GM considers resolution mechanisms
comprising three levels: the community level, the program level, and the judiciary level by following
the formal Mozambican justice process.


                                                    26



                                                                                                       Official Use Only
•   Community-level: Local communities have traditional and culturally recognized grievance
    mechanisms. It is expected that some grievances can be resolved using these mechanisms,
    without the involvement of the contractor(s), the PCU, and/or the government judicial process.
    Local leaders will be involved in resolving any land-related dispute.
•   Program-level: It is expected that program-related grievances be small in size and complexity
    and site-specific. They may be related to noise and vibration, dust emission from construction
    activities, and conflicts between workers and the community, GBV/SEA/SH, among others.
•   Judiciary-level: The program-level process will not prevent complainants from accessing the
    formal Mozambican justice process. The complainant may choose to proceed with the formal
    justice process in case grievance is not satisfactorily resolved at the program level. The program
    staff will provide the complainant with the necessary information on submission of a case to
    the formal justice system.




                                               27



                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                                   Table 10: Description of GM steps

Step                                Description of the process                                                             Timeframe              Responsibility
Step 1: Reception, registration     Grievances can be submitted orally, in writing via suggestion/complaint box,           Immediately            GM focal point at local
and classification of the           through free telephone hotline/mobile, mail, SMS, social media (WhatsApp,                                     district, provincial, and
grievance                           Facebook, etc.), email, website of the program, at community levels. The GM will                              PCU level.
                                    also allow anonymous grievances to be raised and addressed.

Step 2: Confirmation of             Classifying the grievances based on the typology of complaints and the                 Within a maximum of    GM focal point
reception and categorization of     complainants in order to provide more efficient response and provide the initial       5 working days.
the grievance                       response immediately if possible. The typology will be based on the
                                    characteristics of the complainant (e.g., vulnerable groups, people with reduced       This includes
                                    mobility, people with language barriers, etc.) and also the nature of the complaint.   providing the
                                                                                                                           complainant with the
                                                                                                                           basic next step
                                                                                                                           information.

Step 3: Verification,               As grievance is preliminarily classified according to its complexity, investigations   Maximum of 15          GM committee or
investigation and proposed          can be extended on a case-by-case basis. The investigation will need to provide        working days.          resolution team.
response/solution/decision          elements to resolve the grievance to the satisfaction of the complainants. The
                                    investigation will address the following elements: identification of the parties
                                    involved, clarification of grievance and its impact, obtaining factual information
                                    to determine responsibility (taking photos if relevant, discussing with witnesses,
                                    etc.), discussions with all involved parties, and proposed solutions.

                                    If the grievance is vague and not clear enough, the GM team is obliged to help and
                                    provide counsel and even help in redrafting the description of the grievance for the
                                    grievance to become clear for purposes of an informed decision by the GM team
                                    in the best interests of the complainant. If the GM team cannot address the issues
                                    raised by immediate corrective action, a long-term corrective action will be
                                    identified.

Step 4: Communication of the        The decision shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the person who filed the    Within 20 working      Social Specialist of the
proposed                            grievance as well as to any other person or entity to which the recommendation         days upon reception    PCU
response/solution/decision to the   and measures shall apply or is under obligation by law.                                of the grievance.
complainant
                                    The decision shall give a clear assessment of the grievance/complaint, a clear
                                    ruling and recommendations for a fair remedy, and propose measures to modify
                                                                                     28



                                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
Step                               Description of the process                                                               Timeframe                Responsibility
                                   future conduct that caused the grievance as well as proposed measures to
                                   compensate if mitigation measures cannot remedy the harm or injury. The
                                   complainant should acknowledge the reception of the decision and indicate
                                   whether he agrees with it or not.
Step 5: Implementation of the      The Social Specialist of the program, along with other risk management experts (at       Within 15 working        Social Specialist of the
solution/decision to resolve the   provincial and district level) and other entities involved in program implementation     days of signing the      PCU,
grievance                          (including ADIN, ANOP, Government institutions, Contractor, Engineer) will take          agreement with the       Relevant Government
                                   the necessary actions to implement the solution. For solutions that are complex and      complainant.             institutions (provincial
                                   that require more time or multiple activities, the agreement will include an action                               and district level)
                                   plan with a timeline. The agreement must also indicate the budget necessary for its                               Contractor, Engineer
                                   implementation and the specific actors responsible for each activity.
Step 6: Monitoring and             The number and types of complaints will be monitored to take proactive action to         Monthly                  PCU team responsible for
evaluation                         avoid future complaints. The overall effectiveness will be evaluated (responses and                               GM management (led by
                                   conclusions within the deadlines) as well as the overall satisfaction of the users and                            the Social Specialist),
                                   the local community.                                                                                              guided by the program
                                   Data on grievances will be collected in grievance log/database/agreements with                                    coordinator.
                                   complainants and reported to the program coordinator every month. Specific
                                   monitoring indicators are described in chapter 7 of this SEP.
Step 7: Closure of the grievance   Once the solution/decision has been implemented and the complainant is satisfied         Once implementation      Social Specialist of the
                                   with the outcomes, the grievance will be closed. A note to the file will be made to      of the                   PCU
                                   state that the complaint is now following an independent legal system.                   solution/decision is
                                                                                                                            complete and
                                   If the grievance could not be resolved in an amicable endeavor, the complainant          complainant satisfied.
                                   can resort to the formal judicial system, as made available under the national legal
                                   framework. It should be noted that logging a grievance with the GM does not
                                   preclude or prevent seeking resolution from an official authority, judicial or other,
                                   at any time (including during the grievance resolution process) provided by the
                                   national legal framework.




                                                                                     29



                                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
SEA/SH grievances cannot be resolved in an informal manner and should never be the subject of
mediation. Disciplinary sanctions for violation of a Code of Conduct (CoC) or Behavioral Standards
should form part of a process that is internal and under the responsibility of the employer. Employer
sanctions should be appropriate to the seriousness of misconduct and are a separate and independent
process from the criminal proceedings, as this rests with the national justice system.

Information about SEA/SH allegations won’t be disclosed, records of SEA/SH survivors will be stored
separately from other general complaints and in a safe cabinet and systems accessible only to the Social
Specialist and the program lead. Specific protocols and procedures will be established to handle
SEA/SH grievances following the survivor centered approach and national laws.

Labor GM, consistent with the Labor Management Procedures (LMP), as required in ESS2 and ESS10,
should provide a detailed mechanism for the contracted, primary supply and community workers to
raise workplace concerns, as well as handle issues such as demand for employment, labor wages,
payment delays, unhealthy or unsafe working conditions, and labor-related SEA/SH. Workers should
be informed about the GM at the time of recruitment, including the procedures for anonymous
complaints and how the GM ensures protection against retaliation.

As part of the program GM, the complaint resolution will consider appeal process, compensation, and
training as described below: i) the appeals process includes the national judiciary or other mechanisms
out of the program GM, allowing complainants to seek further redress if the initial resolution is
unsatisfactory; ii) the reparations/compensation to provide remedies for program-affected parties,
including compensation for losses, such as damage to property or loss of assets, in line with requirement
for resettlement; iii) the training and capacity building of staff and external stakeholders to manage the
GM effectively. This should include training on documenting grievances, handling complaints, and
implementing resolutions.

7     MONITORING AND REPORTING
7.1   Summary of how SEP will be monitored and reported upon

The SEP will be monitored based on both qualitative reporting (based on progress reports) and
quantitative reporting linked to results indicators on stakeholder engagement and grievance
performance.
SEP reporting will include the following:
    • A quarterly report prepared by the E&S team of the program, covering, in addition to the
        indicators described below, the main commitments specified in the Environmental and Social
        Commitment Plan (ESCP) in relation to the SEP.
    • Cumulative qualitative reporting, prepared on a quarterly basis, included in the ESHS
        performance report, as provided for in the ESCP, should provide feedback received during SEP
        activities, in particular (a) issues that have been raised that can be addressed through changes
        in program scope and design, and reflected in the basic documentation of the program such as
        PAD, ESIA/ESMP, SEA/SH Action Plan, between others; (b) issues that have been raised and
        can be addressed during program implementation; (c) issues that have been raised that are
        beyond the scope of the program and are better addressed through alternative programs,
        programs or initiatives; and (d) issues that cannot be addressed by the program due to technical,
        jurisdictional or excessive cost-associated reasons. Minutes of meetings summarizing the
        views of the attendees should also be annexed to the monitoring reports.
    • The following minimum indicators should be covered:
             o Number of grievances received, disaggregated by gender of workers and worksite,
                 resolved within a specified time frame.
             o Number of SEA/SH cases reported in the program areas.
             o Number of grievances that have been (i) opened, (ii) opened for more than 30 days,
                 (iii) resolved, (iv) closed, and (v) number of responses that satisfied the
                                                   30



                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                 complainants, during the reporting period disaggregated by category of grievance,
                 gender, age, and location of complainant.
            o    Number of actions taken in a timely manner in response to feedback received during
                 consultation sessions with program affected parties.
            o    Number of consultation meetings and public discussions where the feedback and
                 recommendation received is reflected in sub-programs design and implementation.
            o    Number of disaggregated engagement sessions held, focused on at-risk groups in the
                 program.
            o    Percentage of SEP activities implemented.
            o    Number of adjustments made in the stakeholder engagement approach to improve
                 programs’ outreach, inclusion and effectiveness.
            o    Number of instances where consultation feedback was communicated back to
                 communities, including actions taken.

In annex 3 a sample table is included with more details on monitoring and reporting on the SEP,
specifically with key evaluation questions, indicators and data collection methods.

7.2   Reporting back to stakeholder groups

This SEP will be periodically revised and updated as necessary in the course of program implementation
in order to ensure that the information presented herein is consistent and is the most recent, and that the
identified methods of engagement remain appropriate and effective in relation to the program context
and specific phases of the development.

The results of stakeholder engagement activities will be reported back to both program-affected parties’
stakeholders and different stakeholder groups using methodologies and means identified in sections 4.2
and 4.3 of this SEP. Quarterly summaries on grievances, inquiries, should be included in the ESHS
performance report as provided for in the ESCP, together with the status of implementation of
associated corrective/preventative actions, to be collated by the E&S team of the program and referred
to the program coordinator. The quarterly summaries will provide a mechanism for assessing both the
number and the nature of grievances and requests for information, along with the program's ability to
address those in a timely and effective manner.




                                                    31



                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Annex 1: Template to capture consultation minutes
 Stakeholder          Dates of          Summary           Response of        Follow-up     Timetable/
 (Group or          Consultations          of              Program          Action(s)/Next   Date to
 Individual)                            Feedback        Implementation          Steps      Complete
                                                            Team                           Follow-up
                                                                                            Action(s)




Annex 2: Sample Grievance registration form
  A unique code should be assigned to each grievance at the first time they submit a complaint, and
        the same code should be used for all future grievance reported by the same person.
 1. INCIDENT IFORMATION
 1.1 Received By:                       1.2 Date received:                   1.3 Reported by:



 1.4 Grievance category - (Circle as appropriate)
 (Compensation/Land access/Inadequate Notification/Disruption to business or property/ Property
 damage/Environmental damage/Safety Risk/Traffic/Boundary Dispute/Other)
 Other
 ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
 ….
 1.5 Program Related?                   1.6 Date of the report to            1.7 Date of the report to
                                        Contractor:                          PCU:
 Yes: ☐ No: ☐

 - If the grievance is not related to
 the program do not continue.

 1.8 Case ID:                           1.9 Location                         1.10 District:


 1.11 Contract Number:                                      1.12 Name of the contractor:



 1.13 Risk of retaliation: Yes: ☐ No: ☐




                                                       32



                                                                                                         Official Use Only
1.14 Description of grievance:




2. RESOLUTION FEEDBACK

2.1 Complainant satisfied with process? Yes: ☐        Why not?
No: ☐



2.2 Complainant satisfied with outcome? Yes: ☐        Why not
No: ☐



2.3 Other relevant information:


3. ACTION TAKEN TO RESOLVE THE GRIEVANCE

Reported to                       Date Reported                  Action Taken


Print name (complainant):


Signed (complainant)                                  Date:


Signed (Grievance Focal Point)                        Date:


Copied to:




                                                 33



                                                                                Official Use Only
Annex 3: Sample Table: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP

 Key evaluation questions               Specific Evaluation questions        Potential Indicators                    Data Collection Method
 GM. To what extent have program-       • Are program affected parties       • Usage of GM and/or feedback           Records from the implementing
 affected parties been provided with       raising issues and grievances?       mechanisms                           agency and other relevant agencies.
 accessible and inclusive means to      • How quickly/effectively are the    • Requests for information from
 raise issues and grievances? Has the      grievances resolved?                 relevant agencies.
 implementing agency responded to                                            • Use of suggestion boxes placed
 and managed such grievances?                                                   in the villages/program
                                                                                communities.
                                                                             • Number of grievances raised by
                                                                                workers, disaggregated by
                                                                                gender of workers and worksite,
                                                                                resolved within a specified time
                                                                                frame.
                                                                             • Number of Sexual Exploitation,
                                                                                and Abuse/Sexual Harassment
                                                                                (SEA/SH) cases reported in the
                                                                                program areas, which were
                                                                                referred for health, social, legal
                                                                                and security support according
                                                                                to the referral process in place.
                                                                                (if applicable)
                                                                             • Number of grievances that have
                                                                                been (i) opened, (ii) opened for
                                                                                more than 30 days, (iii)
                                                                                resolved, (iv) closed, and (v)
                                                                                number of responses that
                                                                                satisfied the complainants,
                                                                                during the reporting period
                                                                                disaggregated by category of
                                                                                grievance, gender, age, and
                                                                                location of complainant.

                                                                            34



                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Key evaluation questions           Specific Evaluation questions          Potential Indicators                  Data Collection Method
Stakeholder engagement impact      • Was there interest and support       • Active participation of             • Stakeholder Consultation
on program design and                 for the program?                       stakeholders in activities            Attendance Sheets/Minutes
implementation. How have           • Were there any adjustments           • Number of actions taken in a        • Evaluation forms
engagement activities made a          made during program design and         timely manner in response to       • Structured surveys
difference in program design and      implementation based on the            feedback received during           • Social media/traditional media
implementation?                       feedback received?                     consultation sessions with            entries on the program results
                                   • Was priority information                program affected parties.
                                      disclosed to relevant parties       • Number of consultation
                                      throughout the program cycle?          meetings and public discussions
                                                                             where the feedback and
                                                                             recommendation received is
                                                                             reflected in program design and
                                                                             implementation.
                                                                          • Number of disaggregated
                                                                             engagement sessions held,
                                                                             focused on at-risk groups in the
                                                                             program.
Implementation effectiveness.      •   Were the activities implemented    • Percentage of SEP activities        •   Communication Strategy
Were stakeholder engagement            as planned? Why or why not?           implemented.                           (Consultation Schedule)
activities effective in            •   Was the stakeholder engagement     • Key barriers to participation       •   Periodic Focus Group
implementation?                        approach inclusive of                 identified with stakeholder            Discussions
                                       disaggregated groups? Why or          representatives.                   •   Face-to-face meetings and/or
                                       why not?                           • Number of adjustments made in           Focus Group discussions with
                                                                             the stakeholder engagement             Vulnerable Groups or their
                                                                             approach to improve programs’          representatives
                                                                             outreach, inclusion and
                                                                             effectiveness.




                                                                         35



                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
Annex 4: List of Participants in Program Preparation Consultations
 Province       Date              Institution/Organization Represented
                                Government Institutions
 Cabo Delgado   24 February 2026 Pemba District Government
                                  Metuge District Government
                                  Ibo district government
                                  Provincial Directorate of Industry and Commerce
                                  Ibo District Service for Education, Youth and Technology
                                  Ibo District Health, Women and Social Action Service
                                  Ibo District Planning and Infrastructure Service
                                  District Office for Health, Women and Social Action
                                  Chiure
                                  Ancuabe District Office for Economic Activities
                                  Muidumbe Economic Activities District Office
                                  Nangade District Health, Women and Social Action
                                  Service
                                  District Office for Economic Activities of Mecufi
                                  Balama District Office for Economic Activities
                                  District Office for Economic Activities of Chiúre
                                  District Office for Economic Activities of Meluco
                                  Ibo District Office for Economic Activities
                                  Ancuabe District Office of Planning and Infrastructure
                                  District Service of Planning and Infrastructure of Meluco
                                  Nangade District Office for Economic Activities
                                  District Service of Planning and Mecufi Infrastructures
                                  District Planning and Infrastructure Service Macomia
                                  ADIN
                                  Mueda District Secretariat
                                  Nangade District Secretariat
                                  Director
                                  Cabo Delgado Provincial Health Service
                                  SPU Balama
                                  Balama District Office of Education, Youth and
                                  Technology
                                  SPD Meluco
                                  Provincial Secretariat of Economy and Finance
                                  District Service for Health, Women and Social Action of
                                  Palma
                                  District Office for Education, Youth and Technology of
                                  Palma
                                  District Office for Education, Youth and Technology of
                                  Mecufi
                                  District Office for Education, Youth and Technology of
                                  Mocímboa da Praia
                                  Ancuabe District Office of Health, Women and Social
                                  Action
                                  District Office of Education, Youth and Technology of
                                  Montepuez
                                  Montepuez District Health, Women and Social Action
                                  Service
                                  Montepuez District Office for Economic Activities
                                  Mueda District Office for Economic Activities
                                            36



                                                                                         Official Use Only
Province   Date   Institution/Organization Represented
                  Mueda District Office for Education, Youth and
                  Technology
                  Office of the Governor
                  MPD
                  ANOP - MOPHRH
                  Provincial Directorate of Youth, Employment and Sports
                  of Cabo Delgado
                  Nangade District Office of Education, Youth and
                  Technology
                  District Service for Health, Women and Social Action of
                  Meluco
                  Cabo Delgado Provincial Directorate of Health
                  District Office of Planning and Infrastructure of Pemba
                  Namuno District Office for Health, Women and Social
                  Action
                  Namuno District Economic Activities Office
                  District Service for Health, Women and Social Action of
                  Balama
                  Chiure District Planning and Infrastructure Service
                  Balama District Office of Planning and Infrastructure
                  Metuge District Office of Planning and Infrastructure
                  District Office of Planning and Infrastructure of
                  Montepuez
                  Namuno District Office of Planning and Infrastructure
                  Nangede District Planning and Infrastructure Service
                  District Service of Planning and Infrastructures of Palma
                  Metuge District Office for Education, Youth and
                  Technology
                  Pemba District Office for Education, Youth and
                  Technology
                  Muidumbe District Office for Education, Youth and
                  Technology
                  District Office of Education, Youth and Technology of
                  Meluco
                  Ancuabe District Office of Education, Youth and
                  Technology
                  Macomia District Office of Education, Youth and
                  Technology
                  Metuge District Office for Economic Activities
                  Namuno District Secretariat
                  District Service of Planning and Infrastructure of
                  Quissanga
                  Muidumbe District Office of Planning and Infrastructure
                  Cabo Delgado Provincial Directorate of Territorial
                  Development and Environment
                  District Service of Health, Women and Social Action of
                  Quissanga
                  SPD Montepuez
                  SPD Palma
                  SPD Mocimboa da Praia
                  District Office for Economic Activities of Quissanga
                  GP de Cabo Delgado
                            37



                                                                          Official Use Only
Province       Date              Institution/Organization Represented
                                 Cabo Delgado Provincial Directorate of Planning and
                                 Finance
                                 Cabo Delgado Provincial Directorate of Public Works
                                 Muidumbe District Office
                                 Pemba District Office for Economic Activities
                                 District Service of Education, Youth and Technology of
                                 Quissanga
                                 District Office for Education, Youth and Technology of
                                 Chiúre
                                 Cabo Delgado Provincial Directorate of Planning and
                                 Finance
                                 Muidumbe District Health, Women and Social Action
                                 Service
                                 District Office for Health, Women and Social Action of
                                 Macomia
                                 District Service of Planning and Infrastructure of Mueda
                                 Cabo Delgado Provincial Directorate of Health
                                 District Service of Health, Women and Social Action of
                                 Mecufi
                                 Macomia District Office for Economic Activities
                                 Ancuabe District Secretariat
                                 Chiúre District Office
                                PRIVATE SECTOR
Cabo Delgado   24 February 2026 Nutrivida Deokala
                                 Mar e Sol Restaurant
                                 Marisa and Events
                                 CFM Pemba
                                 Provincial Directorate of Industry and Commerce
                                 Petromoc
                                 Avibila Lda
                                 Madopera Comercial
                                 Lis, Lda
                                 Red Point
                                 MozCon, Lda
                                 Sheiva Esplanade
                                 Sanlo Mozambique
                                 Exxonmobil
                                 Nunisa Consultant
                                 JJ Consultants
                                 Cabo Front Farmácia
                                 CPDE Cabo Delgado
                                 Office of the Governor
                                 ADIN
                                 Ministry of Planning and Development
                        CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS
                                 Fruitcad
                                 UNOPS
                                 PIJU
                                 F.Ariel
                                 AMMC
                                 Kutenda - GPCEM

                                           38



                                                                                            Official Use Only
Province   Date              Institution/Organization Represented
                             Doimongo Association
                             Wiwanana Foundation
                             ADEL - CD
                             Cislamo-CD
                             MASC Foundation
                             Blue Foundation
                             Access Women
                             Monção, Lda
                             Secure Accounts and Services
                             Moz Facility
                             Assoti
                             Office of the Governor
                             Rezz Lda
                             ANOP, IP
                             ADIN
                             Promura
                             Livaningo
                             Technoserve
                             FOCADE
                             Africar Rental
                             IDES
                             Moz Facility
                             Muepane Chicken
                             Kuendeleya Association
                             Reef Investment
                             Salama Pemba
                             Coop Mov
                             ANJE
                             The World Bank
                             Ministry of Planning and Development
                           Government Institutions
Nampula    17 February 2026 ADIN
                             Ministry of Planning and Development
                             ANOP, IP
                             The World Bank
                             District Service of Education, Youth and Technology of
                             Ribáuè
                             Memba District Office for Economic Activities
                             District Office of Health, Women and Social Action of
                             Memba
                             Ribaue District Office for Health, Women and Social
                             Action
                             Mecuburi District Office for Economic Activities
                             Malema District Office for Education, Youth and
                             Technology
                             Malema District Secretariat
                             District Office for Education, Youth and Technology of
                             Memba
                             District Service of Planning and Infrastructure of Muecate
                             District Service of Planning and Infrastructure of Memba


                                       39



                                                                                     Official Use Only
Province   Date              Institution/Organization Represented
                             District Service of Planning and Infrastructure of
                             Mecuburi
                             Malema District Office of Planning and Infrastructure
                             Malema District Office for Education, Youth and
                             Technology
                             Ribaue District Office for Economic Activities
                             District Service of Health, Women and Social Action of
                             Muecate
                             Nampula Provincial Directorate of Public Works
                             Ribáuè District Government
                             Memba District Government
                             Erati District Government
                             Mecuburi District Government
                             Malema District Government
                             Muecate District Government
                             District Office of Education, Youth and Technology of
                             Erati
                             District Office for Health, Women and Social Action Erati
                             District Office for Education, Youth and Technology of
                             Muecate
                             Muecate District Secretariat
                             Malema District Office for Economic Activities
                            PRIVATE SECTOR
Nampula    18 February 2026 ANOP, IP
                             SAS, Lda
                             Terminof Logistica
                             Othuma
                             Temzive
                             NBS Investment
                             Casa AAZ, SU, Lda
                             Auto hez
                             Kaku, Lda
                             INCEP, Lda
                             Nutrinatural
                             JM Global
                             AMC Constructions
                             HB Eng. and Construction
                             Korosho Mozambique
                             ADVZ - FCID
                             JD Multiservice
                             Selectayash
                             Actionaid
                             Agi Mozambique
                             Green Agro
                             Mocooon Ltd
                             Trajectus, Lda
                             Che Soud
                             Miniecto
                             Mereca, SU, Lda
                             Agro Rendimento
                             ADIN
                                       40



                                                                                    Official Use Only
Province   Date             Institution/Organization Represented
                            Nutrivida
                            Wissa
                            Ouani
                            CTA
                            Zip code
                            CCD Logistics
                            AGT/CTA
                            Miroky
                            Ministry of Planning and Development
                            The World Bank
                            Sonasserus
                            Moz shopping
                            PSV, Lda
                            Jacasanto
                            InspCosSestood
                            J.A.V, Lda
                            Export Marketing
                            Agro for Life
                            Umblella Investment
                            N&I Dream
                            Tecmarc, Lda
                            Kizamdu Commercial
                            Prome Comercial
                            T.F.L. Norte, Lda
                            Jacaranda
                            Mindelo Fumigações
                            Quisold
                            MN Logistic
                            Omega 3
                            Jobbe Moz, Lda
                            E.S.C
                            CENY Services
                            EJ Transportation and Services
                            Ouriversaria
                            Libya agriculture
                    CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS
Nampula    18 February 2026 UNDE
                            DPOP
                            HRG
                            Ekumi Association
                            ADRA
                            Ovarana Association
                            Hooty
                            Vamossa
                            Ophavela
                            IMC Association
                            AVR Association
                            Nroromelo
                            Nivahane
                            Okhaphelela
                            Bolster
                                     41



                                                                   Official Use Only
Province   Date                Institution/Organization Represented
                               Nivenyee
                               Widow
                               Ossokhela
                               Ouani, Lda
                               AMDN
                               ACN
                               Forum Terra
                               AMR
                               Auto
                               World Vision
                               Wissa
                               Awolcina
                               Ajoval
                               ADAD
                               Agir Mozambique
                               MMP
                               HRG
                               Sold Moz
                               Success Moz
                               Orila
                               AAMozambique
                               Olipa-ODES
                               ANOP, IP
                               Kulima
                               Ministry of Planning and Development
                               APSC
                               Girl Motination
                               The World Bank

Niassa     February 19, 2026   DPOP
                               Niassa District Office for Education, Youth and
                               Technology
                               District Planning and Infrastructure Service
                               District Office for Economic Activities
                               Nipepe District Health, Women and Social Action Service
                               ADIN
                               The World Bank
                               Ministry of Planning and Development
                               ANOP, P
                               District Service of Planning and Infrastructure of Mecula
                               Mecula District Office for Economic Activities
                               District Office of Health, Women and Social Action of
                               Mecula
                               Mecula District Office for Education, Youth and
                               Technology
                               FNDS
                               District Service of Health, Women and Social Action of
                               Marrupa
                               Marrupa District Office for Economic Activities
                               District Service of Planning and Infrastructure of Marrupa
                               Nipepe District Secretariat
                                       42



                                                                                       Official Use Only
Province       Date           Institution/Organization Represented
                              Mecula District Government
                              Marrupa District Secretariat
CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS
Niassa       20 February 2026 Unops
                              UNFPA
                              Progress
                              UN-Habitat
                              UNDP
                              FAO
                              FOFEN
                              Amathes
                              CPS
                              Poverty Alleviation
                              Actionaid
                              'Re
                              Ark
                              Ekweli
                              Ark/Solid
                              UPCN
                              Fassod
                              Amalipo
                              Lambda
                              UCA
                              ICRA
                              Ministry of Planning and Development
                              Sancom
                              MMMR
                              Ark of Solidarity
                              Plasoc-m
                              Fonagni
                              Imani
                              Aru Mozambique
                              OFEC
                              Orera
                              Parliament S
                              Kupweshelama
                              Assoti
                              Amoprec
                              Amodes
                              CBS
                              SOPESC
                              ANIN
                              Aro-Moz
                              Rooas
PRIVATE SECTOR
Niassa       20 February 2026 FAI
                              CROC C. Services
                              Mahoze Services
                              Yarlim M. Services
                              GNY
                              Imperial
                                        43



                                                                     Official Use Only
Province   Date   Institution/Organization Represented
                  Coop.Wannango
                  ALVIDA
                  CAESE
                  GENIUL
                  MM. Garda
                  N'toqua Ecologe
                  C.Qwane
                  Quinta do Pinhal
                  Lucy Fashion
                  Eusébio Agrícola
                  Casa D'Peixe
                  Vulo Aviary
                  Petromasses
                  AV.J.P. Servic.
                  FIS, Lda
                  Dream Agribusiness
                  Kwichinga
                  Sublime Trading
                  Amodren
                  MP. services, and
                  CEP-CTA
                  Attis
                  Transport
                  NEA-CTA
                  JP Compraction
                  Atram
                  Chaqui
                  Lent.F
                  Green Revolution
                  A Redomadul
                  MN. Service, El
                  Bendiak




                          44



                                                         Official Use Only
