Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)



                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                       Project Information Document (PID)

Public Disclosure Authorized



           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01717




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                        Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                                                                                      Mekong Delta Climate
                          Viet Nam                       EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC         P515255                        Resilience and Integrated
                                                                                                                      Transformation Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                                                                                                                      Environment, Natural
                          Investment Project
                                                         24-Apr-2026                   16-Nov-2026                    Resources & the Blue
                          Financing (IPF)
                                                                                                                      Economy
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          The Socialist Republic of      Ministry of Agriculture and
                          Viet Nam                       Environment




_For Official Use Only_
                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          To enhance climate resilience of agricultural production activities and rural communities in selected areas of Viet
                          Nam’s Mekong Delta region



                          Components
                          Strengthening decision-making support systems, institutions, and capacity
                          Enhancing resilience through regional infrastructure
                          Strengthening capacity for vibrant agribusiness and diversified livelihoods
                          Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                           231.81

                            Total Financing                                                                                                231.81


                                                                                                                                                Page 1
                                  The World Bank
                                  Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                                           of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                                    174.54
                              Financing Gap                                                                                                                        0.00

                           DETAILS
                              World Bank Group Financing
                                International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                                    174.54
                              Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                Counterpart Funding                                                                                                              50.20
                                   Borrower/Recipient                                                                                                            50.20
                                Other Sources                                                                                                                      7.07
                                   AUSTRALIA, Government of                                                                                                        7.07




_For Official Use Only_
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@ffiprocessing#doctemplate

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial


                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                           Other Decision (as needed)




                           B. Introduction and Context
                           Country Context

                          1.    Viet Nam has sustained strong growth over recent decades, sharply reducing poverty and improving living
                          standards. Reforms since the 1990s transformed it from one of the poorest countries— Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
                          per capita of US$687.9 in 1990—to a competitive lower middle-income economy with US$4,017.7 in 20241. At the same
                          time, poverty fell from 75.3 percent in 1992 to 4.2 percent in 2022 (US$3.60/day poverty line).2 Building on this impressive


                          1 GDP per capita in constant 2015 US dollars. Source: World Development Indicators (World Bank 2022).
                          2 Based on 2017 Purchasing Power Parity (PPP). Source: World Bank (2025). Poverty and Inequality Platform. https://pip.worldbank.org/country-

                          profiles/VNM

                                                                                                                                                                     Page 2
                                  The World Bank
                                  Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                          development track record, the government targets double‑digit growth in 2026–2030 to reach upper middle‑income
                          status by 2030 and high‑income by 20453. Meeting these goals requires a shift to a more sustainable model: current
                          natural resource mismanagement and environmentally harmful practices are already imposing significant costs and
                          eroding competitiveness4. Through the National Strategy for Green Growth (2021–2030), the government aims for carbon
                          neutrality, ecosystem restoration, and greener, more competitive sectors—backed by coordinated policies, stronger
                          regulation and enforcement, increased public spending, better incentives, and robust private sector participation.
                          2.    The Mekong Delta (MKD) region has been crucial for Viet Nam's national development. Covering 12 percent of
                          the country's territory to the South, it comprises of one city (Can Tho) and five provinces (An Giang, Ca Mau, Dong Thap,
                          Tay Ninh and Vinh Long), contributes 18 percent of GDP and is home to about 20 percent of the population. As Viet Nam’s
                          top agricultural area, the MKD produces a third of the nation's agricultural GDP and over half of its rice and fish, while also
                          leading in fruit and aquaculture output5. The region provides 9.36 million jobs – accounting for 18.1 percent of total
                          national employment6. It plays a major role in both domestic and international agri-food markets, tourism—especially
                          ecotourism—and supports food processing and manufacturing.
                          3.   However, despite its strengths, the MKD lags in economic growth, challenging Viet Nam's goal of reaching high-
                          income status by 2045. Once the primary food producer, the region now reports key economic indicators below national
                          averages, such as per capita income7, job creation, and industrial growth. A lack of well-paid jobs has led to high out-
                          migration, especially among young people, resulting in slow population growth and an aging demographic.




_For Official Use Only_
                           Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          4.      Efforts to boost crop production in the MKD region have led to unintended sustainability issues, such as changes
                          to the hydrologic regime, land degradation, and economic consequences for the most vulnerable communities. Since
                          the 1990s, investments in rice production and landscape engineering (irrigation, drainage, riverine and coastal flood
                          protection, and salinity control) increased yields and exports but brought high environmental costs. Rapid expansion of
                          aquaculture and heavy reliance on groundwater8 in the region has also worsened land subsidence and erosion. The long-
                          term focus on multi-season rice monoculture and intensive aquaculture among smallholders has also led to uneven
                          product quality, food safety concerns, and post-harvest losses. Farmers’ incomes are low or unstable, and environmental
                          costs remain unaccounted for, hampering value addition and rural development. These challenges disproportionately
                          impact the poorest and most vulnerable groups, including low skilled workforce, landless and ethnic minorities, who have
                          fewer options to adapt.
                          5.      Compounding these existing challenges, climate change further threatens the MKD communities’ resilience and
                          economy. The MKD is one of the most climate-vulnerable deltas in the world, particularly at risk due to its low elevation
                          and subsiding plains. Sea level rise and extreme weather events threaten to inundate up to 68 percent of the delta by the
                          end of the century9, disrupting agriculture, infrastructure, and livelihoods. Salinity intrusion, reaching 4‰ as far as 50–70

                          3 Government News (2025). GDP is projected to grow by 8.02% in 2025, with per capita income reaching $5,026. https://baochinhphu.vn/gdp-nam-

                          2025-tang-truong-802-binh-quan-dau-nguoi-dat-5026-usd-102260105152509472.htm
                          4 A recent World Bank study, “Accelerating Clean, Green and Climate Resilient Growth in Viet Nam,” estimated the welfare-based costs of

                          environmental degradation at 10 percent of GDP.
                          5 Annual Economic Report Mekong Delta 2020 (VCCI 2021).
                          6 Based on number of employed persons by province in 2024. Source: General Statistics Office (GSO) (2025).
                          7 Monthly income per capita in the MKD (current prices) is 12 percent lower than the national average in 2024 (GSO 2025).
                          8
                            Overexploitation of groundwater is a major issue in the MKD. While it is not directly addressed in this project, the WB has been providing both
                          investment and institutional support to tackle this issue, including financing groundwater monitoring stations under the Mekong Delta Integrated
                          Climate Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods project (ICRSL, P153544) and several technical assistance under the Australia-Bank Partnership (ABP)
                          Phase 2 ASA.
                          9 Minderhoud, P. S. J., Middelkoop, H., Erkens, G. & Stouthamer, E. Groundwater extraction may drown mega-delta: projections of extraction-

                          induced subsidence and elevation of the Mekong delta for the 21st century. Environ. Res. Commun. 2, 011005 (2020).

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 3
                                     The World Bank
                                     Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                          km inland during dry seasons, could affect nearly half the delta and result in major economic losses without adaptation
                          measures. The MKD coastline is already experiencing alarming rates of erosion, with certain hotspots experiencing 50-100
                          meters of coastal retreat annually. These changes are already apparent today but are anticipated to become more severe
                          in the coming decades. The MKD may become a climate outmigration hotspot10, making urgent climate adaptation
                          strategies and integrated economic planning critical for sustainable growth.
                          6.       Recognizing the intertwined climate and development challenges in the MKD, the Government of Viet Nam
                          (GoV) has set out its long-term plan and vision. The 2017 Prime Minister’s Resolution 120 on Sustainable and Climate-
                          resilient Development of the MKD, and the Mekong Delta Regional Master Plan (MDRMP) 2021-2030 with a vision to 2050
                          guide development towards a sustainable MKD. Resolution 120 promotes an adaptive development model, emphasizing
                          an integrated planning approach towards “living in harmony with nature” and underlying the urgent need for realistic and
                          sustainable adaptation considering the current environmental conditions and the anticipated future climate change. It
                          reorients the agricultural sector’s focus from rice to more diversified livelihoods, emphasizing aquaculture and fruits as
                          the priorities. It provides the foundation for transforming the region from a smallholder farm and short-term provincial-
                          level governance perspective to an inter-provincial, long-term, multi-sectoral development approach. The MDRMP11,
                          approved in 2022 as Viet Nam’s first ever master plan for a region, identifies development principles, and divides the MKD
                          into hydro-ecological zones (i.e., freshwater, brackish-saline water, and saline water zones) with differentiated and
                          tailored development and adaptation strategies. Implementing this master plan requires integrated region-wide
                          investments, enhanced monitoring and decision support systems, modernized and adaptive infrastructure systems, and




_For Official Use Only_
                          technical support for climate-smart transitions in land use, farming practices, and market linkages. In the absence of a
                          regional-level authority in the Vietnamese administrative structure, a Regional Coordination Committee (RCC) for the MKD
                          was established in 2023 to coordinate the MDRMP implementation, but the effectiveness of the RCC has been limited due
                          to the lack of authority in investment and budget decision making. Implementation efforts have relied largely on the
                          relevant ministries and local governments (i.e. MKD city and provinces).
                          7.      The Ministry of Agriculture and Environment (MAE) and the five MKD provinces share the responsibility for
                          implementing the MDRMP and facilitating the transition to climate resilience and sustainable livelihoods. MAE – as the
                          central government agency for agriculture, natural resources (including water and land) management and environmental
                          protection - plays a leading role in ensuring vertical and horizontal coordination across ministries and provinces in policy
                          development, sectoral planning, and key regional investments12. Its inter-provincial backbone infrastructure investments,
                          such as irrigation systems, disaster risk management, coastal and riverbank protection, and value chain development,
                          generate spillover benefits that address regional challenges and facilitate livelihood transitions at the provincial level.
                          Guided by the MDRMP, MKD provinces have developed their own provincial master plans for the period of 2021-2030
                          with a vision to 2050, identifying priority local investments to enhance livelihoods and climate adaptation. Synergies
                          between MAE and provincial investments are fundamental for the successful implementation of the MDRMP and the
                          transformative adaptation needed in the entire region.
                          8.       Evolving climate conditions, and climate-exacerbated impacts and risks present a critical need to strengthen
                          institutional capacity and modernize data systems for enhanced resilience in the MKD. Current disaster and climate risk
                          management information remains fragmented across agencies, with weak synchronization between regional centers,

                          10
                               World Bank, 2022. Groundswell Part 2: Acting on Internal Climate Migration.
                          11 The MDRMP was financed by the Mekong Delta Integrated Climate Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods project (MD-ICRSL, P153544). Both the

                          Resolution 120 and the MDRMP received substantial technical assistance by the WB and other Development Partners under the Mekong Delta
                          Working Group platform. Details in the Section E.Ame
                          12
                             Viet Nam undertook a major government restructuring in early 2025 to streamline its administrative apparatus, reducing the number of
                          ministries and ministerial-level agencies. As part of this reform, the former Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) and the Ministry
                          of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE) were merged to form the Ministry of Agriculture and Environment (MAE). The merger provides an
                          enabling institutional framework to strengthen cross-sector coordination.

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 4
                                 The World Bank
                                 Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                          limiting timely and coordinated responses. Water resource data are still largely siloed or outdated, constraining the ability
                          to monitor groundwater extraction, salinization, and irrigation performance under changing conditions. Irrigation
                          operation and maintenance systems, designed for intensive rice production, are ill-suited to support climate‑smart
                          transitions. These institutional and technical gaps hinder adaptive planning and undermine resilience. Addressing them
                          requires upgrading and connecting disaster and climate risk information systems, digitalizing water databases to enable
                          data sharing, modernizing irrigation operation and management systems to better respond to forecasts. There is also a
                          need for strengthening institutional capacity and enabling framework to coordinate across state-management agencies
                          and use these tools effectively for integrated, climate‑informed delta management. Although these directions are
                          identified in the MDRMP and relevant sectoral plans, implementation remains limited due to resource and capacity
                          constraints.
                          9.       Furthermore, the MKD’s complex and rapidly evolving hydro-ecological system offers a strong opportunity to
                          construct and upgrade climate-resilient and adaptive infrastructure systems. Rising sea levels, increasing disasters and
                          extreme weather, reduced sediment flows, salinity intrusion, and land subsidence interact in complex and unpredictable
                          ways across the MKD, rendering traditional rigid infrastructure increasingly inadequate and, in some cases,
                          counterproductive. Past interventions serving the traditional “fighting nature” approach—such as embankments, dikes,
                          and sluice gates designed particularly for flood protection and salinization prevention—and management practices have
                          often disrupted water and sediment flows, degraded agricultural lands and ecosystems, and constrained water
                          connectivity, leaving communities vulnerable and limiting transitions to more climate-resilient livelihoods. These




_For Official Use Only_
                          challenges manifest differently across subregions: coastal areas face severe erosion, salinity intrusion, mangrove
                          deforestation and rapid land subsidence requiring integrated management measures; the Plain of Reeds struggles with
                          degraded and inflexible canal systems unable to manage increasing hydro-ecological variability and reduce the flood
                          retention capacity of the critical flood plain; the Southwest of the Hau River area experiences fragmented and
                          uncoordinated water management that fails to balance agricultural and aquaculture needs and hamper the transitions to
                          climate-resilient livelihoods; and the South Mang Thit irrigation system is under growing stress from rising salinity,
                          competing water demands, and operational constraints. Addressing these issues calls for context-specific, adaptive, and
                          integrated land and water management. It is imperative that a regional system-wide approach is adopted for
                          infrastructure modernization, and institution and capacity strengthening that enhance resilience and support diversified
                          livelihoods across the Delta.
                          10.      To complement institutional strengthening and infrastructure upgrading, promoting climate-smart agribusiness
                          and livelihood diversification in the MKD will underpin long-term adaptive transitions. Farmer households and
                          cooperatives, however, often lack the skills, knowledge, and behavioral support needed to move from low‑value rice into
                          higher‑value aquaculture, horticulture, and other natural resource‑based livelihoods such as ecotourism, food processing,
                          and handicrafts. Service barriers persist, with insufficient platforms for large‑scale adoption of climate‑smart practices
                          and digital technologies. Certification, traceability, and market linkage systems remain underdeveloped, preventing
                          producers from meeting export standards and capturing higher returns. Private sector participation is constrained by weak
                          incentives and enabling infrastructure, resulting in few new small and medium enterprise (SME) entrants and raising
                          concerns about the continuity of farming and the next generation of farmers. These gaps are particularly acute among
                          vulnerable groups—women, youth, and the landless—who face unequal access to opportunities. To address these
                          challenges, it is imperative that capacity be strengthened for agribusinesses and cooperatives, digital agri‑services
                          expanded, and inclusive value‑chain and climate-smart livelihood models developed that align with the MDRMP. These
                          priorities are well articulated in the MDRMP and MKD provincial plans, but implementation requires better coordination
                          among central to local governments, improved skills and institutional capacity, as well as enhanced private sector
                          engagement to ensure effective and sustained outcomes.
                          11.     The region faces complex challenges that require long-term, coordinated efforts among many stakeholders,
                          necessitating a comprehensive, large-scale programmatic approach of the World Bank’s (WB) support for the MKD.

                                                                                                                                                   Page 5
                                    The World Bank
                                    Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                          From 2016 to 2024, the WB provided US$258 million in financing through the Mekong Delta Integrated Climate Resilience
                          and Sustainable Livelihoods Project (MD-ICRSL, P153544). Guided by the “living with nature” philosophy of Resolution
                          120, the project served as a proof of concept and catalyzed initial shifts toward climate-resilient livelihoods across more
                          than 200,000 hectares. Building on this experience and other WB-supported projects, such as Viet Nam Sustainable
                          Agricultural Transformation (VNSAT) and Mekong Delta Water Management for Rural Development, the proposed
                          Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation (MERIT) Project aims to further enhance institutional
                          capacity, expand climate-smart infrastructure and livelihoods, and accelerate the shift toward a resilient rural economy
                          across the Delta. The project is expected to contribute about 81,000 more and better-paid jobs (MBJ) in the areas of
                          intervention. While this operation focuses on regional investments under the mandate of the MAE, MERIT aims to
                          strengthen the enabling platform for further scaling up results across the MKD13. MAE’s role in implementing inter-
                          provincial backbone infrastructure will strengthen the foundation for integrated provincial-level interventions that are
                          critical to transforming the agricultural sector, enhancing climate resilience, and ensuring sustainable management of
                          natural resources and assets. Provincial governments have indicated their intention to seek WB-financing for provincial-
                          level investments and localized activities that would be catalyzed by MERIT. Such a programmatic approach would allow
                          the government to gradually roll out investments across the subregions and localities, supporting a broader scaling up of
                          results and impacts across the Delta, with continuous incorporation of lessons learned. It further presents opportunities
                          for the WB to remain engaged in the MKD in the medium to long term, and to derive good practices for nature-based,
                          climate-resilient transformation in comparable river deltas globally, emphasizing its contribution to the Knowledge Bank.




_For Official Use Only_
                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)

                          12.     To enhance climate resilience of agricultural production activities and rural communities in selected areas of
                          Viet Nam’s Mekong Delta region.


                            Key Results

                          13.       PDO Indicators. The project will be tracked with the following PDO-level outcome indicators:
                                •   PDO Indicator 1: People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (Number of people) (Corporate Scorecard
                                    Indicator)
                                        o People with enhanced resilience to climate risks – Female (Number of people)
                                        o People with enhanced resilience to climate risks – Youth (Number of people)
                                •   PDO Indicator 2: Landscapes under enhanced conservation and/or sustainable management (terrestrial and
                                    inland water areas) (Hectare) (Corporate Scorecard Indicator)


                            D. Project Description
                          14.      The proposed project is implemented by the MAE over a period of six years with a total cost of US$231.37
                          million, of which IBRD loan: US$174.54 million; DFAT grant: US$7.07 million and Counterpart Fund (CF): US$49.77
                          million. The project consists of the following four components:
                          15.    Component 1: Strengthening decision-making support systems, institutions, and capacity (estimated cost:
                          US$4.38 million of which Grant: US$3.86 million and CF: US$0.52 million). The component fills three interconnected gaps

                          13 In parallel and complementarity to the project, technical assistances by the WB, for example under the ABP Trust fund program, and by other

                          Development Partners are provided to support policy and regulatory reforms aimed at an adaptive and integrated delta management.

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 6
                                 The World Bank
                                 Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                          to shift water and disaster management in the Mekong Delta from fragmented, experience-based practices toward data-
                          driven and coordinated governance. Component 1 will develop a unified platform for climate and disaster risk
                          management in the MKD which integrates data collection, monitoring, and response systems that are currently spread
                          across multiple agencies and databases. The component will also finance the modernization of coordinated systems for
                          the operation of regional and complex irrigation systems, as well as for managing rural water supply sources, enabling
                          more efficient responses to shifting hydrological and climate conditions. Combined, these activities set the blueprints for
                          digitalizing and modernizing databases and platforms to support informed decision-making in the MKD. A common system
                          architecture will ensure seamless integration across all platforms under Component 1. This component builds on previous
                          investments supported by the MD-ICRSL project, particularly the establishment of the Mekong Delta Data Center (MKDC),
                          which is operated and funded by MAE, ensuring the long-term operational and financial sustainability of the proposed
                          investments. All activities under Component 1 are designed to leverage MKDC as the primary data backbone, ensuring
                          continuity, complementarity, cost-efficiency, and long-term institutional development. The component finances technical
                          equipment, research, training and technical assistance, and consulting and non-consulting services.
                               a. Developing the Mekong Delta Disaster Risk Management Information System. This activity finances the
                                    development of an integrated disaster risk management information system for the Mekong Delta region (MD-
                                    DRMIS). The investment covers the integration of existing meteorological, hydrological, and geological monitoring
                                    networks into a centralized spatial and time-series database with standardized formats, automated Application
                                    Programming Interface (API)-based data flows and data exchange protocols. Additionally, it will upgrade four key
                                    hydrodynamic models (MIKE Operations, MIKE Hydro Basin/River, IQQM, and Delft3D) for multi-hazard scenario




_For Official Use Only_
                                    analysis covering flood, drought, salinity intrusion, and erosion; and deployment of advanced IT modules for
                                    predictive analysis. On the infrastructure side, investments include (i) a modernized service-based architecture
                                    comprising a WebGIS and mobile-accessible frontend, an API gateway and middleware backend, and the
                                    integrated MD-DRMIS data layer; (ii) upgraded high-performance GPU servers for model training and expanded
                                    storage capacity; and (iii) new automated internet of things (IoT) monitoring stations measuring water level,
                                    salinity, and pH to fill critical data gaps in ecologically sensitive areas across the Delta. This activity will establish
                                    clear decision-use pathways that link data, models, and IT outputs to disaster risk management actions.
                               b. Modernizing a Unified Management System for Irrigation Infrastructure Operation. This activity supports the
                                    architecture design of a unified management system for the irrigation infrastructure operation in the MKD. The
                                    activity also invests, with a modular approach, in the digitalization and operational modernization of one major
                                    irrigation system as a pilot in the MKD. The need to establish a unified irrigation management system in the MKD
                                    – comprising thousands of sluice gates, canals, and embankments — is acute. The system is currently managed
                                    largely through manual observation and operational decision-making, which limits responsiveness under dynamic
                                    climatic and hydrological conditions. The absence of a unified ministerial-level management system means that
                                    national and regional authorities lack the situational awareness needed to coordinate operations across provincial
                                    boundaries, particularly during flood and salinity intrusion events. This activity both utilizes and informs activity
                                    (a). An architecture design with investment modulars for real-time operational data from sluice gates, pumping
                                    stations, and irrigation control structures across the Delta will be integrated into the MD-DRMIS platform,
                                    providing the required coordinated ministerial-level decision support system (DSS) will be designed. At the same
                                    time, the MD-DRMIS will be utilized to coordinate the operation of inter-provincial irrigation systems. Institutional
                                    arrangements will be clarified to ensure DSS-informed coordination across ministerial and provincial levels. Finally,
                                    this activity will invest in georeferenced infrastructure database, SCADA and IoT sensors at key control points to
                                    form one pilot representative and integrated irrigation management system, i.e. the South Mang Thit Irrigation
                                    System.
                               c. Modernizing Management Systems for Rural Water Supply Sources. This activity includes (i) the establishment
                                    of a centralized rural water supply system database integrated into the MD-DRMIS, incorporating GIS-based multi-
                                    layer digital maps that overlay administrative boundaries, water source hotspots, pipeline networks, salinity


                                                                                                                                                         Page 7
                                   The World Bank
                                   Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                                    intrusion zones, and water demand data, with standardized identification codes assigned to each water works to
                                    ensure synchronized data management across government levels, and (ii) piloting and installing modern Internet
                                    of Things (IoT)-based automatic monitoring equipment at key water sources to track real-time parameters of
                                    water quantity (levels and flow rates) and quality (salinity, pH, turbidity, temperature, and TDS). These
                                    investments will create an integrated digital ecosystem that enables local authorities and communities in the
                                    activity pilot areas to proactively develop response scenarios and coordinate water supply operations during
                                    extreme drought and salinity intrusion events, towards strengthening climate resilience and evidence-based
                                    decision-making for rural water supply management across MKD region.
                          16.       Component 2: Enhancing resilience through regional infrastructure (estimated cost: US$221.43 million of which
                          IBRD loan: US$174.54 million and CF: US$46.89 million). Management measures in the MKD have traditionally relied on
                          infrastructure-based solutions that are often fragmented, reactive, and inflexible in addressing the evolving dynamics of
                          the deltaic system, including increasing climate risks and other internal and external drivers. Investments under this
                          component aim to advance the implementation of a delta-wide vision focused on resilience, climate adaptation, and
                          flexibility at a system level. Specifically, they prioritize regional backbone infrastructure that is essential for realizing this
                          vision – enhancing the delta’s capacity to respond to changing conditions and supporting more diverse, profitable, and
                          sustainable agricultural production systems. The component will be implemented through a hydraulically integrated,
                          system-based design, ensuring coordinated operation and performance of all structures under variable flow, salinity, and
                          climate conditions. Sustainable management is a key focus, and operations and management (O&M) plans will be




_For Official Use Only_
                          developed under the project. Project-supported investments will be operated and funded by relevant agencies under MAE
                          and provinces after construction completion.
                          17.     Interventions will be tailored to the needs of the distinct agro-ecological zones where they are implemented,
                          as specified in the MDRMP, integrating flexibility to achieve the 2030 and 2050 visions. They will include infrastructure,
                          including irrigation and the rural connectivity network (e.g., wave breakers, dikes, embankments, sluice gates, canals,
                          navigation locks, rural roads and bridges, etc.) combined with, where possible, nature-based measures (e.g., mangroves,
                          natural flood management, and use of natural materials for canal and coastal stabilization). Investments under this
                          component are linked to Component 1’s activities as described above, and will complement the activities supported under
                          Component 3 to facilitate livelihood diversification and climate-smart agriculture transition in the project areas.
                          18.      Each sub-component under Component 2 includes associated activities necessary for the delivery of planned
                          infrastructure investments, including land acquisition, compensation and site clearance, detailed engineering design,
                          construction supervision, value-added tax and contingencies. These activities are embedded within the scope and budget
                          of their respective sub-components and form an integral part of the overall investment. They will be subject to applicable
                          assessment processes, including technical, fiduciary, and environmental and social reviews in accordance with the World
                          Bank policies and procedures
                          19.      Component 2 includes the following sub-components:
                                a. Sub-Component 2.1: Coastal Protection in selected areas in the Mekong Delta region (estimated cost: US$42.94
                                   million of which IBRD loan: US$34.17 million and CF: US$8.77 million). This sub-component finances the
                                   construction of approximately 12 km of wave-breaker structures along the coastline of Vinh Long province,
                                   specifically in three locations: Tan Thuy commune, Thoi Thuan commune, and Dong Hai commune. The wave-
                                   breaker structures are climate adaptation measures that can provide robust coastal protection. They are designed
                                   to reduce wave energy reaching the shoreline, promote sediment accretion, facilitate mangrove recovery, which
                                   further acts as nature-based buffers for coastal protection, and thereby minimize climate change-induced coastal
                                   erosion and land losses, including from sea level rise, which is severely affecting assets and livelihoods along the
                                   coast. The design will be based on defined hydraulic and coastal performance criteria, including wave attenuation,
                                   sediment transport, and structural stability under design storm and sea-level rise conditions.


                                                                                                                                                       Page 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                              b. Sub-Component 2.2: Upgrading Infrastructure for Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation in the Plain
                                 of Reeds14 (estimated cost: US$50.26 million of which IBRD loan: US$38.35 million and CF: US$11.92 million).
                                 This sub-component finances a package of integrated water management and rural connectivity investments in
                                 the Plain of Reeds sub-region, a vast low-lying floodplain that depends heavily on its canal network for drainage,
                                 irrigation, and agricultural transport to strengthen the physical and economic resilience of local communities
                                 towards climate-exacerbated hazards, including more frequent and intense flooding, prolonged dry seasons, and
                                 increasing hydrological variability. Years of insufficient maintenance have led to significant sedimentation in the
                                 major trunk regional canals of Phuoc Xuyen and Cho Bung spanning across Dong Thap and Tay Ninh provinces,
                                 reducing water regulation capacity critical for climate change adaptation - particularly for managing and building
                                 resilience to increasingly intense and unpredictable flood regimes under climate change impacts - while also
                                 constraining sediment conveyance capacity, degrading water quality, and limiting agricultural productivity and
                                 restructuring. Canal dredging will restore design capacity, improve water distribution for wet-season crop
                                 production and/or flood-based agriculture, and enhance flood regulation through drainage infrastructure.
                                 Meanwhile, upgrading embankments along the canal will reduce the risk of overtopping and bank erosion under
                                 more intense and prolonged inundation, thereby protecting adjacent agricultural land and communities.
                                 Enhancing all-weather rural connectivity through the rehabilitation and construction of rural roads and bridges
                                 ensures continuity of transport and market access during extreme weather events intensified by climate change,
                                 thereby reducing economic disruption and supporting adaptive livelihoods. These activities are critical for
                                 supporting the region's ongoing agricultural transformation toward higher-value crops (such as high-value fruit




_For Official Use Only_
                                 trees namely longan, durian and mango) and more climate-resilient and diverse livelihoods (such as flood-based
                                 agriculture). Core investments include:
                                 ● Dredging of approximately 61 km of trunk canals, including 44 km of the Phuoc Xuyen canal and 17 km of the
                                      Cho Bung trunk canal, with an estimated total dredged volume of approximately 3.59 million m³.
                                 ● Erosion control measures along the above trunk canals: Construction of 6,244 meters of embankments.
                                 ● Construction of rural roads combined with the embankment and four rural bridges as auxiliary facilities, and
                                      culverts along the two above trunk canals, with total investment of about US$ 9 million, to support agricultural
                                      transformation and improved connectivity in the sub-region.
                                 The rural roads, bridges, and culverts financed alongside dredging are designed to extend the economic benefits
                                 of improved water management by enhancing market access and service delivery in currently underserved areas
                                 of the sub-region. The integrated nature of this investment— combining canal rehabilitation with rural
                                 connectivity – reflects a holistic approach to delivering systemic rather than isolated infrastructure improvements.
                                 Canal rehabilitation will incorporate hydraulic capacity restoration and sediment management considerations to
                                 ensure sustained conveyance and drainage performance.
                              c. Sub-Component 2.3: Water Resource Management in the Southwest Hau River Region15 (estimated cost:
                                 US$72.70 million of which IBRD loan: US$57.18 million and CF: 15.52 million). This sub-component finances the
                                 construction of two tidal control gates and associated navigation and transport infrastructure in the Southwest
                                 Hau River Region:
                                 ● Dai Ngai Tidal Gate: Two gate openings of 30.5 meters each, with a 15-meter navigation lock and one bridge.
                                 ● My Xuyen Tidal Gate: One gate opening of 30.5 meters, with a 15-meter navigation lock and one bridge.
                                 The structures are designed to regulate tidal flows to manage saltwater intrusion into the agricultural hinterland,
                                 which is already exacerbated under changing climate conditions, to maintain freshwater availability for irrigation
                                 during prolonged dry seasons, which are expected to become more frequent and severe under climate change,

                          14 Plain of Reeds (in Vietnamese: Đồng Tháp Mười) is the flood plain on the northern bank of the Mekong River in Viet Nam's Mekong Delta,

                          covering Tay Ninh and Dong Thap provinces.
                          15 Southwest Hau River Region is the area within Can Tho city, surrounded by Hau River to the Northeast, East Sea to the Southeast and Ca Mau

                          province to the Southwest.

                                                                                                                                                                      Page 9
                                  The World Bank
                                  Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                                 and to manage rising sea level. Navigation locks and bridges ensure that the gates do not impede waterborne
                                 transport, which remains a primary mode of goods movement in the region. Completing this system is prioritized
                                 both for its direct agricultural protection value and for the significant existing government investments it is
                                 designed to complement and activate. Navigation locks and bridges will ensure that flood and salinity
                                 management infrastructure does not fragment the region's waterway transport network, which is essential for
                                 rural livelihoods and farm-to-market supply chains. Gate design and operation will follow hydraulic control rules
                                 to regulate salinization, tidal exchange, and upstream water levels.
                              d. Sub-Component 2.4: Upgrading the South Mang Thit16 Irrigation System (estimated cost: US$55.53 million of
                                 which IBRD loan: US$44.84 million and CF: US$10.69 million). This sub-component finances the construction of
                                 six new sluice gates ranging from 12 meters to 50 meters in width, the upgrading of three existing sluice gates,
                                 and the construction of one navigation lock in the South Mang Thit irrigation system, one of the largest and most
                                 strategically significant irrigation schemes in the MKD. The design of each structure explicitly addresses
                                 operational integration with the existing South Mang Thit system, defining how the new gates will coordinate with
                                 existing infrastructure within the entire catchment to achieve optimal water distribution and salinity management
                                 outcomes under increasingly variable climate conditions, facilitating climate-resilient livelihood transitions in line
                                 with the MDRMP. Climate change is intensifying sea level rise, altering river flow regimes, and increasing the
                                 frequency of droughts and extreme events, including flooding. Combined, these climate risks exacerbate salinity
                                 intrusion, disrupt freshwater availability, and complicate irrigation scheduling across the system. This sub-
                                 component will be complemented by Component 1 activity (b), which finances the digital management and




_For Official Use Only_
                                 operational modernization of the South Mang Thit system, ensuring that physical and institutional investments
                                 reinforce each other to deliver a fully functional, modern, and climate-informed irrigation system that supports
                                 adaptive management.
                          20.       Component 3: Strengthening capacity for vibrant agribusiness and diversified livelihoods (estimated cost:
                          US$3.46 million of which Grant: US$2.97 million and CF: US$0.49 million). This component’s objective is to accelerate
                          adaptive livelihood transitions and agriculture-based job creation in alignment with the MDRMP (to 2030, with a vision to
                          2050). Achieving these transitions requires skills development, behavioral change, and efficient mechanisms and
                          platforms for adoption of climate-smart practices and digital technologies, as well as advances in standardization,
                          certification, and access to markets and finance. Interventions under this component are guided by three core principles:
                          (a) full alignment with both national and provincial master plans; (b) a clear linkage between infrastructure investments
                          under Component 2 and the capacity development necessary to pursue livelihood diversification and climate-smart
                          agriculture; and (c) a "no-regret" approach that generates immediate and long-term positive development impacts under
                          a range of future scenarios. The component finances technical equipment, research, training and technical assistance, and
                          consulting and non-consulting services. The objectives of Component 3 will be pursued through three groups of activities:
                               a. Capacity Building for Farmer Cooperatives and Fostering Agribusiness Entrepreneurship. The project will begin
                                    with a systematic review of the capacity building needs of farmer cooperatives and agribusiness start-ups across
                                    the MKD on climate-resilient livelihoods transitions and agriculture-based job creation, building on previous WB
                                    support in the MKD such as ICRSL and VNSAT, identifying priority thematic areas and developing corresponding
                                    instructional materials. Building on this foundation, the project will select farmer cooperatives and start-ups, with
                                    particular attention to those led by youth, to receive customized training and facilitate their linkages to larger
                                    enterprises and value chains. The activities include, but not limited to, strengthening governance structure of
                                    farmer cooperatives, developing business plans, improving financial management skills, operating MRV system
                                    for low-emission rice practices, and enhancing negotiation skills and market linkage, etc. The effectiveness of
                                    these training interventions will be monitored and evaluated on a rolling basis to enable timely improvements.

                          16 South Mang Thit is the whole area south of Mang Thit river within Vinh Long province, surrounded by Co Chien River to the Northeast, Hau River

                          to the Southwest and East Sea to the Southeast.

                                                                                                                                                                      Page 10
                                 The World Bank
                                 Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                              b. Promoting Digital Technology Application for Diversified Rural Livelihoods. Farmers across the MKD are
                                 increasingly able to access digital platforms, yet their capacity to use these tools effectively remains limited.
                                 Relevant platforms encompass a range of services, including agricultural extension, production record-keeping,
                                 local e-commerce, food safety traceability, and carbon finance data provision, etc. The project will identify existing
                                 technical gaps and provide targeted support on both the supply side (platform development, functionality, and
                                 interoperability) and the demand side (capacity of farmers and individuals to utilize platforms). It will also pilot
                                 the development of unified/integrated digital agricultural extension ecosystems, integrating existing platforms to
                                 maximize synergies, to help farmers, cooperatives, and start-ups manage their operations more effectively and
                                 support their progression up the value chain toward more productive and better-quality jobs.
                              c. Scaling “Living with Nature" Production Models, Including Ecotourism. Building on the achievements of previous
                                 WB-financed projects (e.g., MD-ICRSL and VnSAT), this activity will scale proven but not yet widely adopted
                                 production models for selected commodities, as well as ecotourism, which have been identified as priority models
                                 in both national and MKD provincial master plans. Target models leverage both brackish and freshwater resources
                                 through sustainable integrated and rotational systems centered on mangrove, rice, aquaculture, high-value fruits
                                 and lotus, many of which also incorporate ecotourism elements. The project will also work with relevant industry
                                 associations and firms to provide technical assistance on certification, branding, and marketing for higher value
                                 addition.
                          21.     Specific interventions will be selected during implementation based on strategic importance and prioritized for




_For Official Use Only_
                          areas where they complement and reinforce the infrastructure investments financed under Component 2. During the
                          whole process of implementation, efforts will be made to coordinate effectively with ongoing and pipeline IFC initiatives,
                          such as co-locating relevant interventions in the same geographic areas where IFC being active (e.g., aquaculture value
                          chain in Ca Mau province and the coconut value chain in Vinh Long province).
                          22.      Component 4: Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated cost: US$2.09 million of which
                          Grant: US$0.23 million and CF: US$1.86 million). This component will support the management and implementation of
                          project activities. This component will support the management and implementation of project activities. These include:
                          (i) contract management, procurement, financial management, and implementation of the environmental and social
                          instruments; (ii) ensuring coordination among all relevant departments and agencies; and (iii) M&E and reporting on all
                          project activities.
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                             Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            Yes
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

                          23.      The project’s overall environmental risk is Substantial, reflecting civil works across four subprojects in Vinh Long,
                          Dong Thap, Tay Ninh, and Can Tho, including offshore wave-reduction embankments along eroding coastlines, large-scale
                          canal dredging generating approximately 2.5 million cubic meters of dredged material, and construction of navigation
                          locks, culverts, ring dykes, and associated structures. Works occur in a sensitive environment characterised by acid sulfate
                          and saline soils and interconnected waterways under stress from upstream sediment reduction, sea-level rise, land
                          subsidence, and salinity intrusion. Key risks include: water quality degradation and mobilisation of acidity and toxic metals
                          from acid sulfate soils; disturbance to benthic communities and estuarine habitats; transport and disposal of acid sulfate-
                          bearing dredged material; obstruction of fish migration and disruption of ecological connectivity through locks and sluices;

                                                                                                                                                   Page 11
                                 The World Bank
                                 Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                          alteration of tidal, salinity, and sediment dynamics; impacts on communities, sensitive receptors, and cultural heritage;
                          UXO hazards; and occupational and community health and safety risks. Several sites lie in proximity to Tram Chim National
                          Park, Lang Sen Wetland Reserve, and Go Thap Muoi Nature Reserve. Cumulative and transboundary considerations apply
                          given connections to the broader Mekong system, and climate hazards — sea-level rise, salinity intrusion, storm surge,
                          and extreme rainfall — are to be addressed through climate-informed design and the ESIAs. Components 1 and 3 involve
                          no physical works, present Low environmental risk, and are expected to generate indirect positive environmental effects
                          through improved hydrological monitoring and promotion of climate-smart agribusiness. ESS4 Annex 1 dam safety has
                          been assessed and is not triggered.
                          24.      The project’s social risk is currently assessed as Substantial. The main social risks arise from the nature and scale
                          of the land acquisition, the livelihood impacts, the presence of vulnerable and ethnic minority communities, and
                          community health and safety risks associated with construction and labor influx. Infrastructure works — including
                          upgrading embankments, constructing sluice gates, rehabilitating canals — will acquire approximately 122 hectares of
                          public land and 127 hectares of private land. One hundred and fourty one (141) households will be affected by land
                          acquisition, of which, 34 households will need to be physically relocated. All of these physically relocated households were
                          consulted and have expressed a preference for self-relocation, as they want to build house on their garden land which is
                          near the acquired residence. Resettlement impacts mainly include loss of agricultural land; loss of assets attached to land;
                          and disruption to livelihoods. Around 11 households will lose more than 30 percent of their productive land, requiring
                          targeted livelihood restoration measures. Ethnic minorities in the project area are not subject to land acquisition; but




_For Official Use Only_
                          might face adverse impacts which are temporary and limited to the construction phase of Component 2; and risk of
                          exclusion from agribusiness and digital activities due to language barriers, lower literacy, limited cooperative membership,
                          and restricted digital access under Component 3. Component 1 carries a low social risk rating, as it involves no civil works,
                          land acquisition, or direct community intervention. During construction, the project may pose significant community
                          health and safety risks, including increased traffic accidents, restricted access to homes and farming areas, and exposure
                          to dust, noise, vibration, and hazardous materials. To manage potential risks and impacts, mitigation plans such as RPs,
                          EMDPs, SEP, and LMP, etc are proportionally developed by appraisal and adaptively implemented to address emerging
                          needs and challenges.
                          25.      The Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Hazard (SEA/SH) risk classification is considered low, determined
                          using the WB’s Good Practice Note on gender-based violence Risk Assessment and Mitigation in Investment Projects
                          Involving Major Civil Works, in conjunction with the ESF and guidance under ESS4. At present, the SEA/SH risk is considered
                          low, based on factors such as project scale, workforce composition, and site context. This rating reflects that project
                          activities are situated in rural and peri-urban areas with oversight at each work site, and the majority of workers will be
                          recruited locally. Nonetheless, SEA/SH risks have been identified in the ESIA, and the ESMP proposes mitigation measures
                          following the mitigation hierarchy. The ESCP further outlines commitments to incorporate SEA/SH risk management
                          requirements into bidding documents and to engage CSCs to monitor SEA/SH mitigation actions for each civil works
                          package throughout implementation. SEA/SH risks will continue to be monitored, and mitigation measures will be adapted
                          as necessary, particularly if workforce characteristics change or sensitive zones are detected. The risk classification and
                          management approach will be reviewed during ESMP and bidding document finalization to ensure ongoing alignment with
                          WB requirements and evolving project conditions.
                           E. Implementation
                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          26.     The MAE is the project implementing agency and will have overall responsibility for managing the project and
                          reporting to the GoV. The MAE approves the feasibility study (FS) report, issues the Project Investment Decision as per
                          the Public Investment Law, and provides strategic guidance and instruction to the MAE Central Project Office (CPO) and


                                                                                                                                                   Page 12
                                 The World Bank
                                 Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                          Infrastructure Construction Management Board No. 10 (ICMB 10) who will oversee the project implementation. MAE’s
                          two agencies – CPO and ICMB 10 will serve as MAE’s Project Management Units (PMUs) under a Joint Management Task
                          Force (JMTF) which is led by CPO, composed of civil servants and government officials and responsible for management
                          and implementation of their respective project activities. The PMUs will coordinate with relevant Provincial People’s
                          Committees (PPCs) where the project activities occur to ensure smooth implementation. The overall arrangement is
                          provided in Figure 1.
                                                          Figure 1. Institutional and implementation arrangement




_For Official Use Only_



                          27.     The CPO will oversee Component 1, Sub‑components 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 under Component 2, Component 3,
                          Component 4, and, while ICMB10 will be responsible for Sub‑components 2.4 and Component 4. For their respective
                          components, the PMUs will: (a) prepare work plans and budgets; (b) manage procurement; (c) oversee financial
                          management and accounting; (d) ensure environmental and social compliance; (e) lead monitoring and evaluation,
                          including progress reporting; and (f) coordinate with the provinces where investments are implemented. Provincial/City
                          authorities, specifically the PPCs and the relevant provincial and city agencies will, under MAE and PMUs guidance,
                          manage land acquisition and resettlement during implementation, and assume responsibility for operating and
                          maintaining facilities upon project completion. Grant-financed activities under Components 1, 3, and 4 will be
                          implemented by CPO. Further details on the implementation arrangements are set forth in the PIP.
                          28.     Staff from both PMUs bring substantial experience in project implementation and management. They previously
                          led several WB projects such as the MD-ICRSL across multiple provinces and are well versed in the WB’s fiduciary
                          requirements, environmental and social risk management standards, and monitoring and evaluation procedures. As the
                          lead PMU, CPO will also provide project‑wide coordination to ensure coherence across activities, particularly with respect
                          to M&E, technical oversight, knowledge sharing, and the scaling up of good practices.
                          29.     Coordination arrangements between CPO and ICMB 10 have been established to strengthen implementation
                          capacity. MAE has set up a JMTF, led by CPO, to oversee coordination throughout the entire project cycle. This structure
                          leverages CPO’s experience in managing both structural and non‑structural activities across provinces, while drawing on
                          ICMB 10’s strong track record with WB–financed and other GoV’s investment projects in the MKD.



                                                                                                                                               Page 13
                                 The World Bank
                                 Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                          30.      One (1) Project Implementation Plan (PIP) will be adopted for this project. The PIP describes the details of the
                          activities supported under the project and their locations, as well as all relevant stakeholders’ processes, roles, and
                          responsibilities. The PIP remains a living document for assessing project readiness and can be amended during project
                          implementation as needed, following clearance by IBRD before the internal ministry’s approval process. Key areas covered
                          by the PIP include basic project management, institutional responsibilities, financial procedures, fiduciary management,
                          staff selection and management, phased implementation plan, M&E, risk assessment and mitigation measures,
                          Environmental and Social Standards (ESS), a plan for the O&M of the assets once they are handed over to the asset owners,
                          and any other specific reporting requirements as per the GoV and WB policies.
                          31.      The PIP will also include the phased implementation plan for the infrastructure construction activities which
                          will outline: (i) the activities to be financed, organized by the construction phases and procurement packages; (ii)
                          estimated construction costs for each activity; (iii) the required counterpart funds to complete the land acquisition and
                          resettlement process for the activity, and the specific dates by which such amount of counterpart funds shall be made
                          available; (iv) the timeline for completing the resettlement process and land clearance to enable commencement of
                          construction works; and (v) the schedule for approval of detailed technical design, initiation of bidding process, contract
                          award, construction commencement, and completion dates. The key milestones and timeline agreed in the phased
                          implementation plan will serve as a baseline for monitoring and supervision with the Government, facilitating early
                          identification of delays or non-compliance and enabling timely corrective actions. In addition, each year during the project
                          implementation period, the MAE will prepare and adopt an Annual Work Plan (AWP) acceptable to the IBRD, summarizing




_For Official Use Only_
                          the implementation progress of the project for the year and the project activities (financed by both IBRD and grant) to be
                          undertaken in the following calendar year, including the proposed annual budget and any necessary updates to the phased
                          implementation plan.
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Phuong Hoang Ai Nguyen
                             Senior Environmental Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

                           Implementing Agencies
                            Ministry of Agriculture and Environment

                           FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                           The World Bank
                           1818 H Street, NW
                           Washington, D.C. 20433
                           Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                           Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



                                                                                                                                                 Page 14
                               The World Bank
                               Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                   Phuong Hoang Ai Nguyen

                          Co- Team Leader(s):                    Guo Li, Halla Maher Qaddumi

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:              Christophe Crepin                      10-Apr-2026

                          Country/Division Director:             Mariam J. Sherman                      29-Apr-2026




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                      Page 15
