Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDDC01575




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
Viet Nam                       P515255                     Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated
                                                           Transformation Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          24-Apr-2026                 17-Aug-2026                   Environment, Natural
                                                                                         Resources & the Blue
                                                                                         Economy
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             The Socialist Republic of   Ministry of Agriculture and
Financing (IPF)                Viet Nam                    Environment

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve water and land management systems and enhance climate-resilient livelihood opportunities in selected
areas of Viet Nam’s Mekong Delta



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            To be decided

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                      231.44

  Total Financing                                                                                           231.44
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              174.50
  Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing



                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                        Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                                                   174.50
      Non-World Bank Group Financing
       Counterpart Funding                                                                                                                             50.44
          Borrower/Recipient                                                                                                                           50.44
       Other Sources                                                                                                                                        6.50
          AUSTRALIA, Government of                                                                                                                          6.50




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                        Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                         The review did authorize the preparation to continue




    Other Decision (as needed)

    B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1.    Viet Nam has sustained strong growth over recent decades, sharply reducing poverty and improving living
standards. Reforms since the 1990s transformed it from one of the poorest countries—GDP per capita of US$687.9 in
1990—to a competitive lower middle-income economy with US$4,017.7 in 20241. At the same time, poverty fell from 75.3
percent in 1992 to 4.2 percent in 2022 (US$3.60/day poverty line).2 Building on this impressive development track record,
the government targets double‑digit growth in 2026–2030 to reach upper middle‑income status by 2030 and high‑income
by 20453. Meeting these goals requires a shift to a more sustainable model: current natural resource mismanagement and
environmentally harmful practices are already imposing significant costs and eroding competitiveness4. Through the
National Strategy for Green Growth (2021–2030), the government aims for carbon neutrality, ecosystem restoration, and
greener, more competitive sectors—backed by coordinated policies, stronger regulation and enforcement, increased
public spending, better incentives, and robust private sector participation.
2.    The Mekong Delta (MKD) region has been crucial for Viet Nam's national development. Covering 12 percent of
the country's territory, it contributes 18 percent of GDP and is home to about 20 percent of the population. As Viet Nam’s
top agricultural area, the MKD produces a third of the nation's agricultural GDP and over half of its rice and fish, while also




1 GDP per capita in constant 2015 US dollars. Source: World Development Indicators (World Bank 2022).
2 Based on 2017 Purchasing Power Parity (PPP). Source: World Bank (2025). Poverty and Inequality Platform. https://pip.worldbank.org/country-profiles/VNM

3
  Government News (2025). GDP is projected to grow by 8.02% in 2025, with per capita income reaching $5,026. https://baochinhphu.vn/gdp-nam-2025-tang-truong-
802-binh-quan-dau-nguoi-dat-5026-usd-102260105152509472.htm
4 A recent World Bank study, “Accelerating Clean, Green and Climate Resilient Growth in Viet Nam,” estimated the welfare-based costs of environmental degradation

at 10 percent of GDP.


                                                                                                                                                             Page 2



                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


leading in fruit and shrimp output5. It plays a major role in both domestic and international agri-food markets, tourism—
especially ecotourism—and supports food processing and manufacturing.
3.   However, despite its strengths, the MKD lags in economic growth, challenging Viet Nam's goal of reaching high-
income status by 2045. Once the primary food producer, the region now reports key economic indicators below national
averages, such as per capita income6, job creation, and industrial growth. A lack of well-paid jobs has led to high out-
migration, especially among young people, resulting in slow population growth and an aging demographic.
  Sectoral and Institutional Context
4.       Efforts to boost crop production in the MKD region have led to unintended sustainability issues, such as changes
to the hydrologic regime, land degradation, and economic consequences for the most vulnerable communities. Since
the 1990s, investments in rice production and landscape engineering (irrigation, drainage, flood and tidal surge control,
salinity management) increased yields and exports but brought high environmental costs. Fisheries, water quality, and
forest cover – including mangroves – have experienced rapid declines due to unsustainable farming and aquaculture
practices, poor infrastructure design, and the excessive use of chemicals. Rapid expansion of shrimp farming and heavy
reliance on groundwater has also worsened land subsidence and erosion, with reduced sediment from upstream dams
and illegal sand mining further intensifying these problems. The long-term focus on multi-season rice monoculture and
intensive shrimp farming among smallholders has also led to uneven product quality, food safety concerns, and post-
harvest losses. Farmers’ incomes are low or unstable, and environmental costs remain unaccounted for, hampering value
addition and rural development. These challenges disproportionately impact the poorest and most vulnerable groups,
including low skilled workforce, landless and ethnic minorities, who have fewer options to adapt.
5.       Compounding these existing challenges, climate change further threatens the MKD communities’ resilience and
economy. The MKD is one of the most climate-vulnerable deltas in the world, particularly at risk due to its low elevation
and subsiding plains. Sea level rise and extreme weather events threaten to inundate up to 68 percent of the delta by the
end of the century7, disrupting agriculture, infrastructure, and livelihoods. Salinity intrusion during dry seasons could affect
nearly half the delta and result in major economic losses without adaptation measures, trends which are already apparent
today. The MKD may become a climate migration hotspot, making urgent climate adaptation strategies and integrated
economic planning critical for sustainable growth.
6.       Recognizing the intertwined climate and development challenges in the MKD, the Government of Viet Nam
(GoV) has set out its long-term plan and vision. The 2017 Prime Minister’s Resolution 120 on Sustainable and Climate-
resilient Development of the MKD, and the Mekong Delta Regional Master Plan (MDRMP) 2021-2030 with a vision to 2050
guide development towards a sustainable MKD. Resolution 120 promotes an adaptive development model, emphasizing
an integrated planning approach towards “living in harmony with nature” and reorienting the agricultural sector’s focus
from rice to more diversified livelihoods, emphasizing aquaculture and fruits as the priorities. It provides the foundation
for transforming the region from a smallholder farm and short-term provincial-level governance perspective to an inter-
provincial, long-term, multi-sectoral development approach. The MDRMP8, approved in 2022 as Viet Nam’s first ever
master plan for a region, identifies development principles, and divides the MKD into hydro-ecological zones (i.e.,
freshwater, brackish-saline water, and saline water zones) with differentiated development and adaptation strategies.
Implementing this master plan requires integrated region-wide investments, enhanced monitoring and decision support



5 Annual Economic Report Mekong Delta 2020 (VCCI 2021).
6 Monthly income per capita in the MKD (current prices) is 12 percent lower than the national average in 2024 (GSO 2025).

7 Minderhoud, P. S. J., Middelkoop, H., Erkens, G. & Stouthamer, E. Groundwater extraction may drown mega-delta: projections of extraction-

induced subsidence and elevation of the Mekong delta for the 21st century. Environ. Res. Commun. 2, 011005 (2020).
8 The MDRMP was financed by the Mekong Delta Integrated Climate Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods project (MD-ICRSL, P153544).



                                                                                                                                              Page 3



                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


systems, modernized and adaptive infrastructure systems, and technical support for climate-smart transitions in land use,
farming practices, and market linkages.
7.       The Ministry of Agriculture and Environment (MAE) and the five MKD provinces share the responsibility for
implementing the MDRMP and facilitating the transition to climate resilience and sustainable livelihoods. The MAE
plays a leading role in ensuring vertical and horizontal coordination across ministries and provinces in policy development,
sectoral planning, and key regional investments. Its inter-provincial backbone infrastructure investments, such as
irrigation systems, disaster risk management, coastal and riverbank protection, and value chain development, generate
spillover benefits that address regional challenges and facilitate livelihood transitions at the provincial level. Guided by
the MDRMP, MKD provinces have developed their own provincial master plans for the period of 2021-2030 with a vision
to 2050, identifying priority local investments to enhance livelihoods and climate adaptation. Synergies between MAE and
provincial investments are fundamental for the successful implementation of the MDRMP and the transformative
adaptation needed in the entire region.
8.     While strategic and policy advances have been made, several major gaps remain for the effective implementation
of the MDRMP, including:
    •    Infrastructure limitations: Regional and local systems were built for intensive rice farming, limiting flexibility, and
         restricting transitions to climate-adaptive agriculture. Upgrading infrastructure is needed, guided by spatial
         planning and climate projections.
     • Unsustainable practices: Excessive groundwater use and chemicals are harming land and water quality, while
         mangrove losses are increasing risks. Adopting climate-smart methods is slow due to limited knowledge,
         incentives, and support.
     • Poor regional coordination: Sustainable management of irrigation systems, coastal and riverine erosion, flooding
         and drought, and groundwater is hampered by a lack of institutional coordination, fragmented data, and
         inefficient cross-sectoral planning.
     • Capacity constraints for livelihood diversification and job creation: Rural residents lack the required support,
         information, skills and market access to shift to higher-value or nature-based jobs. Private sector participation is
         limited by weak cooperatives and insufficient business capacity, affecting market access and quality standards.
9.       The region faces complex challenges that require long-term, coordinated efforts among many stakeholders. The
World Bank (WB) supports a comprehensive, large-scale programmatic approach for the MKD. The recently closed
Mekong Delta Integrated Climate Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods Project (MD-ICRSL, 2016–2025) was guided by
the “living with nature” philosophy of Resolution 120, serving as a proof-of-concept and enabling initial climate-resilient
livelihood changes across more than 200,000 hectares spanning nine provinces. Building on this experience and other WB-
supported projects, such as Viet Nam Sustainable Agricultural Transformation and Mekong Delta Water Management for
Rural Development, the proposed Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation (MERIT) Project aims
to further enhance institutional capacity, expand climate-smart infrastructure and livelihoods, and speed up the shift
toward a resilient rural economy across the Delta.
 Relationship to CPF
10. MERIT is aligned with the ongoing discussions on the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Viet Nam. The
MERIT project is highly relevant to the two proposed High-Level Outcomes (HLO) of Enhanced productivity and sustained
growth and Sustainable livelihoods through adaptation to climate risks and mitigation. Specifically, it is aligned with the
proposed Objectives on Improved Climate Adaptation, especially in the Mekong Delta and Other Vulnerable Geographies
and Greener Investments and Transition to a Low-carbon Resilient Economy.




                                                                                                                           Page 4



                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


11. MERIT is consistent with Viet Nam’s climate commitments, including its 2022 updated Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC) and the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) for 2021-2030. Viet Nam committed to reducing its emissions
by 15.8% unconditionally (43.5% conditionally) by 2030 across energy, agriculture, land use, land-use change, and forestry
(LULUCF), waste, and industrial process sectors. Activities under MERIT are expected to contribute towards emission
reductions in the agriculture and LULUCF sectors by supporting low-carbon agricultural practices and improved land use
practices, including carbon sequestration through mangroves and agroforestry. The NDC also highlights the importance
of adaptation measures, particularly in the highly vulnerable Mekong River Delta. MERIT activities will include multiple
measures identified in the NDC, including building climate-resilient communities, increasing the adaptive capacity of
economic systems, and improving institutional capacity for climate adaptation.
12. MERIT is aligned with findings of the Viet Nam Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) which calls for
a coordinated regional intervention for the MKD as priority package #1. The CCDR states that a regional MKD intervention
should focus on stemming land subsidence and saline intrusion, retrofitting existing physical assets to be less vulnerable
to inundation, and ensuring climate-informed development. These are the focus areas of MERIT. The project is expected
to serve as a model for other regions facing similar challenges in Viet Nam and globally.
13. MERIT is aligned with WBG Global Initiatives. MERIT contributes to the AgriConnect initiative by enabling
diversified, profitable, and sustainable agricultural systems, facilitating inclusive growth and climate adaptation for
smallholder farmers and enabling private sector’s participation in the agricultural value chains. At the same time, with its
emphasis on linking water investments to agricultural transformation, MERIT is strongly aligned with the Mission Water
Initiative – financing critical water infrastructure to enhance resilience and serve as a catalyst for jobs and livelihoods.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To improve water and land management systems and enhance climate-resilient livelihood opportunities in selected
 areas of Viet Nam’s Mekong Delta.

  Key Results (From PCN)
   • PDO Indicator 1: Number of agencies regularly use the disaster and climate risk information system9 for decision
       making (Number of agencies)10
   • PDO Indicator 2: Area served by improved water and land management systems11 (Hectares) (Corporate Scorecard
       Indicator)
   • PDO Indicator 3: Project beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks (Number of people, disaggregated
       by gender and youth) (Corporate Scorecard Indicator)12




9 The system includes forecasts, risk maps, analytics, irrigation operation plans, etc.
10 Agencies operate at all levels, spanning from national to sub-national, and provincial departments.
11 Improved systems refer to measures of the project that help reduce land, water, and environmental degradation, as well as enhancing natural

habitats and sustainable production.
12 The methodology for identifying and measuring enhanced resilience follows a sequential logic. (1) “Resilience” refers to climate resilience to

climate-related hazards. The resilience is enhanced after project’s interventions; (2) The project’s interventions that improve resilience in the
project are high-intensity support (e.g., activities that directly manage climate risk, reduce physical climate impacts, build adaptive capacity, or
address underlying systemic drivers of vulnerability); (3) Beneficiaries who need “enhanced resilience” are population at risks of climate change
and requiring further resilience based on exposure and vulnerability characteristics; (4) The project’s interventions help beneficiaries to reduce
exposure and sensitivity to climate-related hazards and/or increase adaptive capacity; (5) The indicator for “enhanced resilience” is measured by
the number of beneficiaries who directly receive or benefit from qualifying project activities that demonstrably contribute to resilience outcomes.

                                                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


    •     PDO Indicator 4: Households with more diversified livelihood opportunities from project-supported sustainable
          practices and diversified livelihoods (Percentage)13
 D. Concept Description
14. The proposed MERIT project would help to operationalize the vision and strategies laid out in the MDRMP and
address current and future climate change impacts. The project would (i) further enhance the information and
management tools to support adaptive delta management; (ii) build new infrastructure and repurpose and upgrade
existing regional infrastructure to enhance climate resilience and promote more sustainable and climate-smart
management of water and land resources; and (iii) facilitate climate-smart livelihood transitions and diversification, value
chain development, dynamic agro-entrepreneurship, and an accelerated adoption of sustainable agricultural practices.
15. The proposed project will be designed as an Investment Project Financing (IPF). It will be implemented by the MAE
and have the following components.
16. Component 1: Strengthening decision-making support systems, institutions, and capacity (estimated cost: US$
7.28 million).
The proposed aim of Component 1 is to improve data and information infrastructure, management tools, and institutional
capacity for adaptive delta management in the MKD. Component 1 will finance activities such as:
    • Upgrade information systems for disaster and climate risk management. These systems will be connected to and
       synchronized within MAE’s regional decision support systems (such as the MKD Center in Can Tho and the Forecast
       Center housed in the Southern Institute of Water Resources Research (SIWRR) in Ho Chi Minh City).
    • Develop and digitalize water databases and modernize irrigation O&M systems.
Component 1 will also provide capacity building and information/knowledge sharing for more efficient resource use and
more effective planning, early warning, and decision making – linked to the above activities.
Investment activities under this component will directly support the operation of infrastructure investments under
component 2.
17. Component 2: Enhancing resilience through regional, systems-level infrastructure (estimated cost: US$ 218.95
    million).
Management measures in the Mekong Delta have traditionally relied on infrastructure-based solutions that are often
fragmented, reactive, and inflexible in addressing the evolving dynamics of the deltaic system, including increasing climate
risks and other internal and external drivers. Investments under this component aim to advance the implementation of a
delta-wide vision focused on resilience, climate adaptation, and flexibility. Specifically, they prioritize regional backbone
infrastructure that is essential for realizing this vision – enhancing the delta’s capacity to respond to changing conditions
and supporting more diverse, profitable, and sustainable agricultural production systems. Interventions will be tailored to
the needs of the distinct agro-ecological zones where they are implemented, as specified in the MDRMP, so that they are
context-specific and appropriate in tackling the diversity and interconnectedness of challenges across the deltaic system.
They will include a combination of nature-based measures (e.g., mangroves, natural flood management, and use of natural
materials for canal and coastal stabilization) and grey infrastructure, including irrigation and the rural connectivity network
(e.g., wave breakers, dikes, embankments, sluices, canals, navigation locks, rural roads and bridges, etc.).
Investments are expected to include:
    •     Implementing hybrid coastal protection solutions in Vinh Long province to reduce risks of coastal erosion.


13 “More diversified livelihoods” refers to more choices of livelihoods activities supported by the project, particularly under Component 3. They

include both agricultural and non-agricultural income-generating activities.

                                                                                                                                                    Page 6



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


    •   Rehabilitating canal systems in the Plain of Reeds subregion to increase resilience to climate risks, enhance flow
        circulation, manage flooding, and support climate-smart agricultural production for the region.
    •   Building major integrated sluice gate–navigation lock systems in the Southwest of the Hau River subregion, to
        better manage water resources and tidal flooding, increase the resilience and productivity of agricultural areas to
        more saline conditions, and improve connectivity.
    •   Building sluice gates and navigation locks in the South Mang Thit irrigation system to stabilize livelihoods and
        enhance the region’s resilience to salinization.
Investments under this component will complement the activities supported under component 3 to facilitate livelihood
diversification and climate-smart agriculture transition in the project areas.
18. Component 3: Promoting climate-smart livelihood transitions and diversification (estimated cost: US$ 2.7 million).
This component aims to accelerate adaptive livelihood transitions and agriculture-based job creation aligned with the
MKD regional master plan (to 2030 with vision to 2050). These transitions require skills development, behavioral change,
efficient mechanisms, and platforms for large-scale adoption of practices and digital technology, standardization and
certification, and access to markets and finance. Design of the interventions follow the principles of: a) aligning well with
both provincial and national Mekong Delta master plans; b) having a clear linkage between “infrastructure investments”
and the development of “livelihood diversification and climate-smart agriculture”; and c) “no regret” interventions, i.e.,
generating immediate and long-term positive development impacts regardless of future uncertain conditions.
Component 3 includes the following key activities:
    • Promoting agribusiness through capacity building.
    • Upgrading digital agri-services to support traceability, certification and market linkage, etc. and
    • Developing value-chain and circular economy models for selected commodities.
These activities will be financed by grants or counterpart funding. Given limited financial resources, MERIT interventions
will be selected based on their strategic importance and will focus on the areas of the investments financed under
component 2.
19. Component 4: Project Management (estimated cost: US$ 2.02 million).
This component will support the management and implementation of project activities. These include: (i) preparation of
detailed engineering designs and construction supervision; (ii) land acquisition, compensation, and site clearance required
for the infrastructure investments; (iii) contract management, procurement, financial management, and implementation
of the environmental and social instruments; (iv) ensuring coordination among all relevant departments and agencies;
and (v) M&E and reporting on all project activities.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                      Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           TBD
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No




                                                                                                                         Page 7



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Phuong Hoang Ai Nguyen
 Senior Environmental Specialist

 Guo Li
 Senior Agriculture Economist

 Halla Maher Qaddumi
 Senior Water Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Agriculture and Environment

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Phuong Hoang Ai Nguyen, Guo Li, Halla Maher Qaddumi

Approved By

                                                                                                      Page 8



                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Mekong Delta Climate Resilience and Integrated Transformation Project (P515255)




Practice Manager/Manager:               Christophe Crepin                     20-Jan-2026

Country Director:                       Mariam J. Sherman                     04-Feb-2026




                                                                                                    Page 9



                                                                                            Official Use Only
