Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Clean Metro Manila (P515014)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 01/19/2026 | Report No: ESRSC05403




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 30, 2026                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Clean Metro Manila (P515014)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P515014                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      Clean Manila                2027

                     Operation Name            Clean Metro Manila

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Philippines               Philippines                            EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC        Environment, Natural
                                                                                                                   Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                   Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of the           Department of Interior and Local       05-Oct-2026                  27-Nov-2026
                     Philippines               Government (DILG) , Department of
                                               Environment and Natural Resources
                                               (DENR), Metro Manila Development



Public Disclosure
                                               Authority (MMDA)

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     17-Dec-2025               1,072,376,439.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     to improve solid waste management, including reducing plastic pollution in selected LGUs across the National Capital
                     Region of the Philippines


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The first phase of Clean Philippines Multiphase Programmatic Approach will cover Metro Manila, the National Capital
                     Region (NCR), including all of its 17 LGUs. The project consists of four components: Component 1. Strengthening policy
                     and institutions for improved solid waste management, Component 2. Improving local service delivery for better solid

                    Jan 30, 2026                                                                                                   Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Clean Metro Manila (P515014)



                     waste management, Component 3. Improving waste infrastructure and plastic waste management for a circular
                     economy, and Component 4. Innovation, learning, and public awareness for behavioral change. This first phase will be
                     led by Metro Manila Development Authority (MMDA) and will be supported by the Department of Environment and
                     Natural Resources (DENR) and the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG). This phase addresses one
                     of the country’s SWM hotspots, in an area where LGU capacity is among the highest nationwide. The project will
                     improve solid waste management and reduce plastic pollution in the National Capital Region of the Philippines.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     NCR has 17 LGUs (16 highly urbanized cities, 1 municipality) and 1,710 barangays. In 2024, NCR reached 14,001,751
                     inhabitants, 12.42% of total population. Population grew by 0.91% from 2020 to 2024, higher than the national rate
                     (0.81%), but declining since 1995 (0.97%). NCR’s population density is high at 22,600 persons/sq. km. Manila City, the
                     capital, is the most congested, edging the regional average by four times (76,165 persons/sq. km). NCR was 8th in GRDP
                     growth in 2024 (5.6%), but the highest in gross levels (PhP6.9 trillion) and per capita GDP (Php595,768).

                     SWM issues in the country and in Metro Manila show a distinctive pattern: increasing waste volumes projected at
                     23.6M tons by 2025, especially organic waste and plastics, poor waste disposal methods, declining waste management
                     capacities, and low plastic processing capacity. SWM infra investments in urban areas face major issues led by land
                     shortages, health and safety risks in blighted areas, and differing LGU fiscal priorities. Informal waste workers (IWWs)
                     are responsible for diverting about 32% of plastics and other recyclable materials from landfills, remain marginalized in
                     SWM planning. Barangays are responsible for solid waste collection but are constrained by the lack of funds and



Public Disclosure
                     collection trucks. Informal settlements, where garbage proliferates, are partly served by waste collection services.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     MMDA was created in 1995 under RA 9524 to plan, monitor and coordinate public services whose impact is beyond the
                     legal and administrative boundaries of Metro Manila’s 17 LGUs and/or could be costly for each LGU to provide. SWM is
                     one such service where MMDA leads planning and implementation of policies, programs and standards. It is in charge of
                     SWM facility establishment and operations, including waste reduction, reuse and recycling programs.

                     MMDA has limited experience and capability in E&S risk management under the Bank’s Environmental and Social
                     Framework (ESF). For the past five years, MMDA is involved in only one Bank-assisted project – the Metro Manila Flood
                     Management Project Phase 1 (MMFMP1) - implemented under the safeguards framework. E&S risk management in
                     MMFMP1 was largely handled by the Dept of Public Works and Highways ((DPWH), with little training and exposure for
                     MMDA.

                     For Clean-PH, the MMDA is expected to form a project management unit (PMU) represented by offices in planning,
                     finance and administration and operations (Solid Waste Management Office or SWMO). Dedicated E&S specialists for
                     the project will be largely contracted. The policy and operational roles of DENR, DILG and NCR LGUs in E&S risk
                     management will be determined at the appraisal stage.

                     A GFPP grant will be utilized by MMDA for ESIA preparation including the preparation of ESF instruments, i.e., ESMF,
                     SEP, LMP, RPF, SEA/SH action plan and ESCP. The Bank will also provide ESF orientation training to MMDA staff to

                    Jan 30, 2026                                                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Clean Metro Manila (P515014)



                     initiate capacity building early. Implementation support will focus on building and strengthening the project’s E&S risk
                     management system and capabilities, which include E&S risk screening, assessment, and monitoring; contractor
                     management, stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanisms (GRM). The project has a capacity building
                     component where ESF implementation will be supported.


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                  High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                           High
                     The Environmental risk category is High, given the potential for large-scale infrastructure and proposed
                     improvements to existing SWM systems, including closure of dumpsites and landfills and construction of new waste
                     management facilities and MRFs. Consequently, the nature and magnitude of ES risks and impacts are medium to
                     large in scale, with a range of significant adverse impacts with some long-term, permanent, and/or irreversible, such
                     as direct risks associated with landfill rehabilitation. Project activities will support infrastructure and service delivery
                     for improved SWM such as establishment of centralized material recovery facilities (MRF), composting, refuse derived
                     fuel (RDF), anaerobic digestion, black soldier fly (BSF) for advanced processing of waste, and modernized transport
                     and transfer equipment with tech-enabled monitoring features, rehabilitation and greening of landfills and
                     dumpsites. Construction of these facilities may pose occupational health and safety (OHS), community health and
                     safety (CHS), traffic management, dust, air, noise, and water pollution. Additionally, dumpsite rehabilitation might



Public Disclosure
                     pose additional risks of soil, water and groundwater pollution through landfill leachate, and CHS risks through
                     landslides, landfill gas explosions and fire. Operation phase ES risks and impacts may include OHS, odor, CHS, traffic
                     management and pollution. The Project will also support LGU level interventions through PBG and PBC. A preliminary
                     list of eligible activities along with exclusion criteria will be refined during project preparation. The project will
                     manage these ES risks and impacts via Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) (including screening
                     list and exclusion criteria), Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Environmental and Social
                     Management Plans (ESMPs), and Labor Management Plans (LMPs) that will be prepared before project appraisal.
                                                                                                                                             High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Social risk rating is High. First, the project proposes land-intensive SWM infrastructure, notably new citywide
                     materials recovery and circular economy facilities (MRFs/CEFs) and landfill remediation projects to be sited in highly
                     dense urban areas in Metro Manila, some close to informal settlements and socialized housing sites. Second, there
                     are critical social receptors that may face displacement (physical and/or economic), safety, and health risks. These
                     include land occupants and informal waste workers (IWWs), including underaged IWWs subsisting or living in
                     dumpsite communities normally found within or in proximity to landfills and transfer stations in Metro Manila, and
                     urban communities potentially hosting MRF investments. Third, MMDA has very limited knowledge and experience
                     on the ESF, capacity and experience in resettlement and livelihood restoration planning and implementation, with
                     absent to limited experience in working with LGU inter-agency committees (LIAC) tasked with overseeing and
                     authorizing resettlement activities in LGUs. Finally, contextual risks could be high in host communities, where there is
                     land shortage, potential zoning conflicts, land disputes involving community-based organizations, private sector, and
                     national housing agencies and “not in my backyard (NIMBY)” household behavior. In comparison, community-based


                    Jan 30, 2026                                                                                                         Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Clean Metro Manila (P515014)



                     SWM projects proposed at the barangay and city/municipal levels that are site-specific and/or building on existing
                     pilot projects could have moderate to substantial social risks. National laws and departmental issuances promoting
                     IWW inclusion in 10-year local SWM plans provide opportunities to improve their labor and working conditions,
                     integrate them into LGU SWM systems, and enhance access to essential services.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      Construction and operation of infra facilities may pose OHS, CHS, traffic management, dust, air, noise, odor and
                      pollution. Landfill and dumpsite rehabilitation might pose additional risks of soil, water and groundwater pollution
                      through landfill leachate, and CHS risks via landslides and fire. Critical social receptors, e.g., land occupants and IWWs
                      that may face safety, and health risks. During project preparation, a pre-feasibility study (PFS) will identify locations,
                      technology and scope of the investments that have significant adverse ES impacts. A preliminary ESIA will be
                      prepared. As details of all activities are not known at this stage, an ESMF will be developed establishing screening and
                      rating criteria for pilot sites and processes, and TORs for site specific ESIAs and ESMPs. Procedures will be developed
                      in handling human remains found during clean-up of Metro Manila waterways, i.e., notification of authorities,
                      handling and fencing, and shutdown/resumption of activities.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      A major risk is the exclusion of vulnerable groups in project design, benefit-sharing, GRM, and adverse processes
                      impacting them like involuntary resettlement. Info disclosure could be inadequate including representation and
                      involvement of authorized individuals or groups in community consultations and planning processes. For IWWs,
                      benefit-sharing may be impeded by formalization and regulations made with little feedback from them. Low uptake
                      of GRM could be due to delayed preparation, improper disclosure (e.g., unnoticed spaces), and little dissemination.
                      Another issue is the lack of compliance with requirements around participatory decision-making and sensitivity for
                      people facing displacement, especially if they are women, poor, and have disabilities and uneducated. A Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP) is required, with stakeholder identification and analysis, and consultation, information
                      disclosure and inclusion strategies developed for pre-con, construction and operation stages.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      Project workers consist of direct workers, contracted workers for civil works and community investments, community
                      workers in barangay activities, and primary supply workers. IWWs involved in planning/capacity building programs
                      are beneficiaries, not project workers. In case they are community volunteers, ESS2 will apply. Labor influx is minor as
                      skilled and unskilled labor can be sourced locally. Major risk areas are OHS; poor working conditions for those in
                      hazardous and difficult conditions (e.g., flood-prone/cramped areas, landfills), and lack of labor protection for
                      vulnerable workers like women, IWW volunteers, with disabilities and below 18 years (working age). Labor
                      Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared, with project worker estimates, labor risk assessment and mitigation
                      measures per national laws and regulations on working conditions, protection of vulnerable workers, OHS and
                      emergency response and preparedness (ERP), and grievance redress mechanisms (GRM).


                    Jan 30, 2026                                                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Clean Metro Manila (P515014)



                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      Construction and rehabilitation of landfills and centralized MRFs may cause air emissions, dust, odors, litter,
                      windblown debris, hazardous waste handling. Leachate and runoff from landfills and dumpsites may contaminate soil
                      and water. Waste-to-energy (WTE) activities can emit hazardous pollutants, including CO₂, CO, NOₓ, SO₂, particulate
                      matter, ammonia, acids (HCl, HF), VOCs, dioxins/furans, PCBs, PAHs, metals (e.g., mercury), and sulfides, depending
                      on waste composition and combustion conditions. Ash and residues from WTE may contain hazardous materials.
                      Waste collection and transport can lead to dust, bio-aerosols, odors, vehicle emissions, contaminated runoff, and
                      noise. ESMF/ESIA and site-specific ESMPs will identify risks and recommend mitigation measures. Uncontrolled
                      landfills and dumpsites may emit significant greenhouse gases; GHG estimation will be conducted as part of the ESIA.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      Community health and safety risks during construction and rehabilitation activities will be related to typical civil work-
                      related hazards such as noise, dust, air pollution, vibration exposure, traffic risks. During operation, communities
                      living in vicinity to landfills and dumpsites may be exposed to physical, chemical, and biological hazards such as odor,
                      noise, dust, and vector borne diseases. Additional risks will include fire, explosion and health impact. Biodegradable
                      waste can be combustible, and aerobic degradation can produce sufficient heat to cause spontaneous combustion in
                      certain circumstances resulting in fire. Methane from anaerobic digestion in landfills may ignite if it contacts an
                      ignition source inside or outside the landfill. Methane in landfill gas may get trapped underground or move along
                      geologic faults, posing explosion risks. ESMF/ESIA and site specific ESMPs will identify relevant risks and appropriate
                      mitigation measures will be recommended.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      Land is needed for new MRFs/CEFs, and landfill rehabilitation can disrupt land-based activities. Land tenure and
                      displacement are key risk areas that should be substantiated in all sites. Due diligence will cover tenure issues, e.g.,
                      presence of claimants, occupants and institutional landowners, impediments to expropriation (e.g., absent
                      landowners or documents), and zoning or land use conflicts. Physical and economic displacement will be assessed
                      from permanent or temporary use of lands for facilities, worksites and access roads. Due diligence aims to inform site
                      selection, prioritization, and the proportionate allocation of resources and support to high-risk sites. A Resettlement
                      Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared, containing the principles, requirements and institutional arrangements for
                      resettlement planning and implementation. An assessment and capacity-building plan for MMDA will be developed
                      to build the necessary knowledge and skills in managing the resettlement process.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      At this stage of project development, exact location of project activities is not known. Manila Bay Key Biodiversity
                      Area (KBA), Mounts Irid-Angilo and Binuang (KBA), and Upper Marikina River Basin Protected Landscape located in
                      vicinity to Metro Manila. Before appraisal potential impacts of project activities on biodiversity will be assessed. SWM
                      facilities located near high-value habitats around Metro Manila will be screened and managed for biodiversity risks
                      using the mitigation hierarchy (avoid, minimize, restore, offset), a precautionary approach, and adaptive
                      management.



                    Jan 30, 2026                                                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Clean Metro Manila (P515014)



                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional              Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The standard is not relevant because the project areas are not within ancestral domains and are not occupied by
                      indigenous peoples as defined in the criteria set out in ESS7 (para 8).

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                      Relevant

                      NCR LGUs have 240 cultural properties consisting of churches, architectural and historical monuments, bridges, and
                      engineering structures. Due diligence should be conducted to assess whether these forms of built heritage in host
                      LGUs are in proximity or within the influence area of proposed investments to determine the risk of adverse physical
                      and/or visual impacts. As a precautionary measure, chance finds procedures should be prepared and integrated into
                      the ESMF for infra investments involving civil works and earth-moving activities. Per ESS8 requirements, chance finds
                      procedures should cover notification, fencing, assessment of third parties, mitigation actions, and training of
                      contractors and workers.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        No




Public Disclosure
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                        In Part
                       The Borrower has robust laws and regulations on solid waste management, environmental and social impact
                       assessment, labor and resettlement which will be used in this project. These are the Philippine Ecological Solid Waste
                       Management System Act (ESWM, Republic Act or RA 9003), Philippine Environmental Impact Statement System
                       (PEISS) under Presidential Decree (PD) 1586 and the Philippine EIA System Framework (DENR Administrative Order
                       2003-30); Labor Code of the Philippines (PD 442) and other laws and issuances of the Department of Labor and
                       Employment for private sector workers and Civil Service Commission (CSC) for government workers; Philippine
                       Rightof- Way Act (RA 10752) and the Accelerated and Reformed Right-of-Way Act (RA 12289) and the 1992 Urban
                       Development and Housing Act (UDHA, RA 7279). The Project will comply with national laws and regulations and will
                       use WBG ESF.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No




                    Jan 30, 2026                                                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Clean Metro Manila (P515014)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     At this stage of project preparation location, scale and scope of project activities are not known. Therefore, an
                     Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that includes a sub-project screening criteria and exclusion
                     list will be developed by appraisal. Regarding investment activities such as landfill and dumpsite rehabilitation and
                     closure, preparation of a preliminary feasibility study (Pre-FS) is underway. According to outcome of the Pre-FS, a
                     preliminary Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared by appraisal. Full ESIA will be prepared
                     as part of full FS, informing location and technology selection under FS. The following draft documents to be prepared
                     and disclosed by appraisal:

                     - Preliminary ESIA

                     - Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which includes SEA/SH action plan, and chance finds

                     procedures

                     - Labor Management Procedures (LMP)

                     - Resettlement Framework (RPF)




Public Disclosure
                     - Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)

                     - Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)

                     The Preliminary ESIA, ESMF, RPF, LMP, and SEP will be finalized and disclosed prior to issuing the invitation for
                     negotiation. The ESCP will be completed following the conclusion of negotiation and publicly disclosed. These timelines
                     will be included in the ESCP for implementation.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Pawan G. Patil                         Title:         Senior Environmental Economist

                      Email:                 Ppatil@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Katelijn Van den Berg                  Job Title:     Senior Environmental Specialist

                      Email:                 kvandenberg@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Yuko Arai                              Job Title:     Senior Urban Specialist



                    Jan 30, 2026                                                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Clean Metro Manila (P515014)



                      Email:                  yarai@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                           Pawan G. Patil, Katelijn Van den Berg, Yuko Arai

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                  Oznur Oguz Kuntasal

                     ADM Social Specialist:                         Annabelle Vitti Corpuz Valenzuela




Public Disclosure




                    Jan 30, 2026                                                                                       Page 9 of 9
