Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Clean Metro Manila(P515014)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDDC01555




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
Philippines                    P515014                       Clean Metro Manila
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          05-Oct-2026                   27-Nov-2026                  Environment, Natural
                                                                                          Resources & the Blue
                                                                                          Economy
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Republic of the Philippines   Department of Interior and
Financing (IPF)                                              Local Government (DILG) ,
                                                             Department of
                                                             Environment and Natural
                                                             Resources (DENR), Metro
                                                             Manila Development
                                                             Authority (MMDA)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
to improve solid waste management, including reducing plastic pollution in selected LGUs across the National Capital
Region of the Philippines

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    To be decided
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              To be decided

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                      1,072.38

  Total Financing                                                                                           1,072.38
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               350.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

DETAILS

                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                          Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Clean Metro Manila(P515014)



   World Bank Group Financing
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 350.00
   Non-World Bank Group Financing
       Counterpart Funding                                                                                          722.38
         National Government                                                                                        169.16
         Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                                                  553.22




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                         Concept Review Decision
High                                                                 The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1. The Philippines has emerged as one of the fastest-growing economies in East Asia and the Pacific (EAP) over recent
decades, demonstrating significant progress in poverty reduction. Reforms initiated in the late 1980s and 1990s
established the basis for sustained economic recovery and acceleration, underpinned by increased trade openness,
gradual expansion of the financial sector, and infrastructure development. The cumulative effect of reforms
complemented by prudent fiscal and macroeconomic policies, supported robust Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth,
to an annual average of 6.4 percent during the 2010-2019 period. Despite a slowdown in global economic activity, average
GDP growth is projected to remain resilient at 5.5 percent year-on-year for 2025–2028. The national poverty rate declined
to 15.5 percent in 2023, surpassing the pre-pandemic level of 16.7 percent recorded in 2018. The government anticipates
further reducing poverty to 9 percent by 2028, alongside aspirations to attain upper middle-income status in the near
term.
2. Development ambitions, however, are threatened by the country’s high exposure to natural hazards and risks
associated with climate events, which significantly undermine livability, economic growth, and poverty reduction. The
Philippines is recognized as the world’s most exposed country to natural hazards and natural disaster risks. Extreme
weather and seismic events – including typhoons, floods, earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions – regularly disrupt the
country, imposing a heavy toll on lives, livelihoods, and the economy. On average, more than 20 tropical storms form near
the Philippines each year, with an average of eight making landfall. Between 2012 and 2023, disasters resulted in the loss
of around 11,000 lives, affected 130 million people, inundated urban centers, and caused economic losses estimated at
US$9 billion. Over the long term, annual losses from typhoons and earthquakes are projected to exceed US$3.3 billion.1

1 Philippines Country Partnership Framework 2025-2031



                                                                                                                            Page 2



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


Furthermore, slow-onset climate change impacts – such as rising temperatures and sea levels – are expected to exacerbate
these challenges, with potential losses reaching up to 13.6 percent of GDP by 2040 in the absence of effective adaptation
and mitigation measures.2
3. Rapidly developing urban centers are a key driver of growth in the Philippines – ensuring they become greener,
more livable and sustainable will be critical to deliver on the country’s development ambitions. The Philippines is
experiencing rapid urbanization – almost half of all Filipinos live in urban areas - and the proportion is increasing. In
addition, the Philippines has the second-highest average urban density in East Asia and the Pacific Region. Within the
National Capital Region (NCR) of Metro Manila, this density is about 60 times higher than the Philippine national average.
Cities are the country’s engines of economic growth, accounting for around 80 percent of the country’s GDP. By itself, NCR
hosts 19 percent of the nation’s total business establishments and generates around 30 percent of GDP. The seven largest
urban areas host 54 percent of formal jobs. However, the concentration of people, assets, and economic activities allows
cities to enjoy basic infrastructure and services.
4. Rapid urbanization, economic growth, and evolving lifestyles have, however, significantly increased solid waste
generation across the Philippines, while the capacity for solid waste management (SWM) has not kept pace.
Nationwide, the Philippines produces approximately 61,000 metric tons of solid waste daily, with volumes rising sharply
from 9 million metric tons in 2000 to an estimated 23.6 million metric tons by the end of 2025, or 11.2 percent growth
annually over twenty-five years. Of this total, Metro Manila alone accounts for over 10,400 tons per day, or approximately
3.65 million metric tons in 2025 or 15.5 percent of the national annual total. Currently, only 567 out of the nation’s 1,634
local government units (LGUs) - about one third - are served by sanitary landfills. These facilities are estimated to handle
approximately 22,638 metric tons of solid waste daily, leaving roughly two thirds of the country’s daily solid waste
generation unmanaged and typically discarded or disposed of in the natural environment.2
5. This situation has placed the Philippines among the top global contributors to marine plastic pollution. Mismanaged
plastic waste in the country has been estimated at 1.88 million metric tons per year. Marine plastic pollution is a global
concern, with plastic estimated to account for 80% of all marine debris in the oceans,3 threatening biodiversity, assets,
livelihoods and jobs, and blue economy prospects in the Philippines and worldwide. Marine plastics is a transboundary
challenge, due to the movement of plastics across boundaries through shared river systems, coastlines, and oceans. The
magnitude of the global marine plastic crisis led to an unprecedented resolution by the United Nation’s Environment
Assembly in March 2022, through which 175 countries endorsed a resolution to “End Plastic Pollution: Towards an
international legally binding instrument”, and to establish an Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC) to develop
a global treaty to address plastic pollution. The Philippines is a committed party to this resolution.
6. The inadequacy of infrastructure and services to address mismanaged solid waste and plastic pollution in the
country is associated with a range of environmental, social, and economic impacts, jeopardizing long-term sustainability
prospects. Poorly managed solid waste contributes to environmental degradation, including contamination of ground and
surface water, overflowing dumpsites, air pollution from open burning or methane leakage from landfills, and adverse
effects on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. These environmental challenges translate into widespread public health
risks for local populations and communities living near dumpsites, as well as for informal waste pickers. Vulnerable and
underserved areas and communities, including the poor, are disproportionately affected by pollution from mismanaged
waste.
7. Mismanaged solid waste, particularly plastic waste, significantly exacerbates flood risks. Flooding results in
significant loss of life, assets, and productivity, with overall economic losses estimated at up to US$4 billion per year. When
inadequately managed, collected and properly treated, solid waste, especially plastics, ends up in waterways and

2 Philippines Country Climate Development Report, 2023
3 IUCN (2018) Issues Brief – Marine Plastics https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/marine_plastics_issues_brief_final_0.pdf



                                                                                                                                     Page 3



                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


accumulates in drainage canals, rendering them ineffective, placing additional stress on already strained urban systems
and amplifying the impacts of climate-related events. In Metro Manila, for example, collection gaps result in significant
volumes of uncollected garbage being dumped into creeks, rivers, and drainage canals. During heavy rains and typhoons,
waste accumulates at critical points such as pumping stations and trash racks, severely impeding water flow and discharge,
reducing the capacity of flood control infrastructure and leading to prolonged and more severe flooding events –
eventually transforming otherwise routine rainfall into hazardous flooding, displacing communities, and causing
significant economic and social disruption. Studies and operational records from the Metro Manila Development Authority
(MMDA) estimate that about 17,000 cubic meters (approximately 5,000 tons) of solid waste are removed from pumping
stations each year.
8. Mismanaged solid waste and plastic waste also represent a lost opportunity for job creation and economic growth.
Recent World Bank analyses suggest that up to USD 800-900 million annually are lost in the Philippines due to low recycling
levels, particularly plastic recycling. This represents an opportunity to better integrate plastic waste into the economy
through optimized recovery and recycling, creating quality green jobs, and contributing to green growth targets. By
optimizing recovery and recycling, the sector is estimated to create thousands of quality green jobs, support MSMEs, and
drive inclusive growth.
9. Mismanaged and untreated food and organic waste also give rise to resource loss and environmental impacts. In
Metro Manila, food and other organic waste make up about 43 percent of the total waste stream, and up to 52 percent
nationally. When this waste is disposed of in mixed landfills without adequate gas capture and treatment, it generates
substantial methane emissions (a potent greenhouse gas (GHG) – plumes from major Metro Manila landfills are large
enough to be detected by satellites. Capturing and treating landfill gas can therefore reduce emissions and create
sustainable revenue streams. The Philippines has endorsed the Global Methane Pledge,4 committing to help achieve a 30
percent reduction in global methane emissions by 2030. The Government’s 2019 National Strategy to reduce Short‑Lived
Climate Pollutants (SLCP) from the municipal solid waste sector5 sets targets to curb methane from waste. This ambition
is expected to increase in the updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) now under preparation.
10. Solid waste collection rates in the Philippines are low overall. While the rate of waste collection in the NCR is
estimated at 80-90 percent6, the national average collection rate is much lower — around 40 percent—and varies widely
by region and municipality income class. Metropolitan areas tend to exceed 80 percent coverage, with the majority of
municipalities falling below 30 percent due to remoteness, resource constraints, and weaker infrastructure.7 Furthermore,
the current waste management system is mostly based on collection of mixed waste, including in the NCR, and the rate
of diversion of waste through material recovery and circular economy facilities is low with mixed waste often delivered
straight to landfills.8 While some 20 percent of Barangays in the NCR have small Material Recovery Facilities (MRFs), they
are unable to process the lion’s share of generated waste. Waste, neither landfilled nor collected, sorted and recycled,
ends up polluting the natural environment and where people live across the country, including in the NCR and the Manila
Bay, notorious for its plastic pollution.9



4 https://www.globalmethanepledge.org/#pledges
5 NSWMC, DENR and IGES (eds.) 2019, National Strategy to Reduce Short-Lived Climate Pollutants from

Municipal Solid Waste Sector in the Philippines, Department of Environment and Natural Resources,
Quezon City, Philippines.
6 The collection rate of 80-90 percent is based on public statistical information, but the actual collection of waste may be much less. Some studies

suggest 60 percent or less.
7 World Bank. 2024. “Guidance on the Development of a Roadmap for Managing Plastic Waste and Reduction of

Non-Recyclable Single-use Plastics in the Philippines.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
8 World Bank. 2022. An Assessment of Municipal Solid Waste Plans, Collection, Recycling and Disposal of Metro Manila. Washington DC.
9 https://www.abs-cbn.com/spotlight/01/25/24/study-millions-of-plastic-trash-found-in-portions-of-manila-bay



                                                                                                                                               Page 4



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


11. Service delivery performance in the Philippines remains uneven, reflecting wide differences in LGUs’ financial and
institutional capacity and geography. The country’s 1,634 LGUs (plus 17 in the NCR) range from highly urbanized cities to
small municipalities, with large variations in density and urban form. In Metro Manila alone, for example, Manila,
Caloocan, Mandaluyong, and Pateros exceed 30,000 persons/km², while Muntinlupa, Valenzuela, Parañaque, Quezon City,
and Las Piñas fall below 20,000 persons/km²—implying very different collection logistics, land availability for facilities, and
flood and waste‑leakage risks. These asymmetries translate into uneven SWM performance. A World Bank assessment of
Metro Manila’s 17 LGUs ranked them into four tiers of SWM readiness, reflecting gaps in waste generation control,
collection systems, diversion infrastructure, and plastic ordinances. Wealthier LGUs, such as Quezon City and Manila City,
can consider PPPs for waste‑to‑energy and solarization, while many others struggle with basic tariff enforcement, project
identification, and financing.
12. Against this backdrop, supporting fit-for-purpose improvements in SWM systems is essential for reducing the
severity of flooding, enhancing environmental quality and human health, and enabling long-term growth. Such
improvements would also help lower GHG emissions (primarily methane) and reduce air pollution resulting from the open
burning of waste. Addressing these challenges requires a concerted, long-term, and targeted approach to SWM reform
and investment across the country. Key steps include identifying and implementing effective policies and reforms to
enhance SWM systems, improving the quality, coverage, and financial/economic sustainability of service delivery, and
investing in fit-for-purpose infrastructure tailored to the diverse LGU needs, ultimately moving from a predominantly
mixed waste system to a (source)-segregated waste system to enable material recovery and a more circular economy.
Ensuring that stakeholders are actively engaged, informed, and sensitized throughout the process is also critical to
achieving a sustainable and inclusive solution to the country’s solid waste management challenges.


 Sectoral and Institutional Context
13. The waste sector is governed primarily by the Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000 (RA 9003), which
mandates universal waste collection, source separation, and the closure of open dumpsites. The Act identifies LGUs as
the primary SWM implementers, making them responsible for preparing and executing 10-year SWM plans, enforcing
segregation, and operating material recovery facilities (MRFs). Additional functions are legislated to the National Solid
Waste Management Commission (NSWMC), who oversees SWM policy and technical guidance nationwide, and the
Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) and its Environmental Management Bureau (EMB), who
provide regulatory oversight.
14. The Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) Act of 2022 (RA 11898) institutionalizes producer responsibility for their
plastic packaging waste, aiming to phase out single-use plastics (SUPs) and increase recycling rates. SUPs are a major
concern due to their widespread use, increasing availability, substantial volume, and difficulty to recycle. Approximately
163 million plastic sachets, 48 million plastic bags, and 45 million thin-film plastic bags are used daily in the Philippines. In
2019, Filipinos generated 1.7 million metric tons of post-consumers plastic waste, with only 9 percent recycled, 33 percent
disposed in landfills, and 35 percent discarded on open land and waterways. To respond to this situation, the country
adopted a SUP Roadmap in February 2024. The roadmap, enshrined by NSWMC Resolution No. 1363, s.2020 prioritizes
the reduction of non-recyclable plastics through a policy-oriented approach rooted in existing legislation and focused on
regulatory enforcement and LGU capacity building. As a complement, the National Plan of Action on Marine Litter (NPoA-
ML) targets zero waste in Philippine waters by 2040.
15. Implementation of the Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000, however, remains weak. Only a fraction of
households properly segregate waste, and many local governments lack the infrastructure, budget and innovations to
collect, process, dispose and monitor waste flows safely. This is especially acute in smaller municipalities and rural areas
but remains valid even across LGUs with the highest capacity in major urban centers. A 2023 Performance Audit of the
current Philippines Solid Waste Management Program by the Commission on Audit (PAO-2023-01) suggested that “the


                                                                                                                            Page 5



                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


situation may be attributed to the frail enforcement and compliance with the law due to political, financial, and technical
limitations of the local government units (LGUs) and implementing agencies. Many LGUs have yet to comply with
establishing local SWM Boards, submission of SWM Plans and establishment of MRFs and require greater investment.”
Key identified constraints to support Act implementation include (i) institutional and governance challenges; (ii) service
delivery shortcomings, including underfunding, cost recovery and unsustainable models; (iii) lack of strategies to promote
material recovery and circularity, and insufficient fit-for-purpose infrastructure to support collection, transport,
processing, recovery and disposal; and (iv) limited innovation, research, and public outreach.
Planning, financing, and institutional challenges leading to service delivery shortcomings
16. The Philippines must address the root causes of its SWM challenges, which begins with institutional and governance
challenges. Despite the existence of Republic Act 9003, there is weak national enforcement of provisions like waste
segregation at source and proper disposal. This results in continued open dumping and unregulated landfills. In terms of
planning, LGUs are required to prepare 10-year solid waste management plans (reviewed and endorsed by NSWMC), the
quality and substantiveness of these plans is often uneven, leading to uneven execution across the nation. For example,
a standardized capex/ opex calculation is missing in many LGU level SWMPs. With regards to financing, LGU budget
requirements to execute these plans are often delinked from the overall fiscal transfers provided to LGUs to also execute
them, lacking budgets that are ringfenced for the sector. There are also institutional issues, particularly on staffing and
human resources, as most LGUs do not have permanently appointed staff positions focused on SWM service delivery.
Data transparency is limited, and while LGUs have self-reported service delivery performance data (e.g., collection,
treatment, diversion rates etc.) such data lacks a robust verification framework, which introduces challenges in grasping
the actual landscape of SWM service delivery challenges and performance levels in the country or date-driven decision-
making to improve it.
17. RA 9003 states that the provision of SWM infrastructure and service delivery are the responsibility of LGUs. However,
due to limited LGU capacity, such provisions are often fully or partially supported by national government agencies with
inadequate attention to boosting LGU planning, financing, and institutional capacities for service delivery improvements.
Responsibilities in SWM infrastructure provision and service delivery are also fragmented across LGUs, DENR, and DILG as
well as other National Government Agencies (NGAs). For LGUs to take a more active role in waste management over time,
NGAs should transition from a role of service provider to that of a facilitator, supporter and enforcer, debottlenecking
critical reforms in SWM.
Lack of fit-for-purpose infrastructure and circular economy promotion
18. At least 300 additional landfills are immediately needed to properly dispose of daily waste across the Philippines in
the absence of material recovery and circular economy facilities. Only 28 percent of plastics are recycled, and 78 percent
of material value is lost, resulting in an annual loss of $790-$890 million to the national economy. Key challenges include
high operating costs – the estimated cost of landfilling daily waste ranges from PHP 17 to 46 million per day (US$288,000-
780,000) – insufficient cost recovery, lack of sorting and material recovery, limited enforcement of regulations, and
persistent open dumping. While informal sector participation remains high, integration into formal systems is limited and
often not desired.
19. Investments in large, centralized, or “clustered”, city-wide material recovery and circular economy facilities remain
a gap, and are needed to ensure access to such facilities by all Barangays in the LGUs. Material recovery facilities exist
in several Barangays, but these typically recover the recyclable fraction of the waste as there is a lack of space to treat the
other waste fractions such as low value plastics or organic waste. For the treatment of these waste fractions more space
would be needed and clustered into larger, centralized facilities to support more cost-effective larger facilities within LGUs
and clustered between LGUs.



                                                                                                                          Page 6



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


20. For LGUs with (large) landfills, there is also the lack of cost recovery for operating the landfills and insufficient
landfill gas infrastructure. Capturing landfill gas to generate electricity and establishing emission reduction credits is
critical to advance revenues and support cost recovery for the operation of the landfill.
Limited innovation, research, and public outreach
21. By investing in public awareness and behavioral change activities, the Philippines is better positioned to create
cleaner, healthier, and more resilient urban environments. Technical solutions alone are insufficient to address the
complex, deeply rooted challenges of waste generation, disposal, and recycling. According to a World Bank (2024) global
report, integrating public awareness and behavioral change activities into SWM projects is not optional – it is fundamental
for achieving lasting results ranging from increasing participation and service uptake, reducing illegal dumping and
associated health risks, enabling sustainable waste reduction and recycling, building trust and accountability, and
supporting policy reform and financial sustainability.10 To date, there is no data informed national awareness program in
the Philippines with common messaging from NGAs that nudges behaviors across the country in a common direction.
The Philippines also needs to innovate and support research and development in alternatives to plastic to reduce
dependencies and generate green jobs. Research and development of alternatives to conventional plastics is critical
because bans and taxes only work when affordable and functional substitutes exist. World Bank analyses covering the
Philippines shows that many policies falter without viable alternatives—plastic bag bans struggle due to high costs of
substitutes—underscoring the need for innovation to bring down costs and improve performance of new materials.11
World Bank regional guidance also calls for targeted research and development partnerships to develop plastic
substitutes and circular designs, highlighting that jobs created in alternative sectors can ease transition frictions. While
raw materials exist to provide such alternatives, there is no national program to facilitate such R&D.

 Relationship to CPF

22. The proposed Clean Philippines program aligns and supports the objectives of the World Bank Group’s Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Philippines (FY2026-2031, Report No. CPF0000034). The proposed program will
improve SWM and service delivery, reduce pollution environmental pollution from plastic waste and open burning, and
lower GHG emissions, thus supporting the long-term overarching goal of improving environmental and human health
outcomes for Filipinos. The program is explicitly included under the CPF, supporting Outcome Area 3, “enhancing socio-
economic resilience”, and the cross-cutting theme of “supporting an efficient public sector”.
23. The proposed program is also fully aligned with World Bank global priorities. These include GHG reduction, curbing
plastic waste and pollution, improving air quality, and creating more and better jobs. It directly contributes to the WBG
corporate scorecard outcome 3 (healthier lives) and 5 (green and blue planet with resilient populations).


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 The proposed MPA’s PDO is to improve solid waste management, including reducing plastic pollution in selected LGUs
 across the Philippines




10 https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-

reports/documentdetail/099091423124016666/p1773440302811082084c8056db86923f14
11 Ibid



                                                                                                                         Page 7



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Clean Metro Manila(P515014)



 D. Concept Description

24. Envisioned as a US$350 million IPF with Results Based Financing, MPA’s Phase 1 will improve SWM and reduce
plastic pollution across the Philippine’s NCR. Metro Manila is the Philippines’ NCR, with approximately 14 million people
and covering 636 square kilometers. It consists of 17 LGUs, 16 cities, and one municipality that are ranked among the
nation’s highest capacity local governments. At the same time, like most regions across the Philippines, NCR suffers
significant SWM infrastructure and service delivery gaps. As a result, the Philippines is estimated to be one of the world’s
largest plastic waste polluters from land-based sources into the ocean with NCR considered a hot spot. This is because
over 18 percent of the nation’s ocean-bound plastic pollution originates from NCR LGUs, with land-based discarded plastic
waste flowing into the Pasig River and Manila Bay. The sheer volume of poorly managed wet and dry waste has polluted
urban centers, clogged the city’s drainage systems, waterways, and pumping stations, as well as the natural environment,
with exacerbated flooding during storms and impacts on the health and well-being of Filipinos as waste decays untreated.
25. Metro Manila’s challenges in managing their waste, the large impacts it causes, and the global nature of the
problem, are all justifications for it to be selected as the first phase of the Clean Philippines MPA. Phase 1 will support
MMDA and DENR as key national government agencies responsible both for supporting LGUs in meeting their SWM
requirements and for monitoring their compliance vis a vis the law. Specifically:
  MMDA’s mandate includes overseeing and coordinating SWM in Metro Manila, formulating and implementing policies,
  standards, and programs. A key assignment is the development of 10-year SWM Plans for the NCR, based on plans
  prepared by the 17 LGUs. In addition, MMDA is responsible for establishing agreements with private landfill operators,
  payment of tipping fees (based on volume of waste dumped) servicing 17 LGUs across the NCR, establishing and
  operating disposal and processing facilities (at pumping stations), cleaning NCR waterways of waste, and supporting
  LGUs through NCR-wide public education campaigns and community-based projects (such as waste-to-reward programs
  and equipment for waste management to local communities).
  DENR’s SWM role is to act as the primary enforcer of the Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000 (RA 9003)
  and EPR Act of 2022, providing guidelines, setting reduction targets, and overseeing national programs. It chairs the
  National Solid Waste Management Commission (NSWMC) which reviews and approves LGU SWM plans, supports LGUs
  across the Philippines in developing their waste management plans, and implements environmental protection projects
  like closing open dumpsites and establishing material recovery facilities (MRFs). It is the point agency for reducing ocean-
  bound plastic pollution and promoting circular economy solutions, including supporting alternative material use. It
  operates the National Ecology Center which conducts knowledge and information dissemination, education and training
  for LGUs.
26. An innovative feature of the project is the proposed application of Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) and
Performance-Based Grants (PBGs) to generate the right kind of incentives for reform. A results-based approach to
tackling systemic challenges in SWM service delivery can effectively improve overall sector performance. The program
proposes to utilize PBCs to incentivize national level entities only, since PBGs are being structured for LGU incentives
(even if PBCs could be structured to incentivize necessary actions by LGUs too). Based on a review of good global practice,
PBCs are perhaps better structured to target improvements in national policy, regulations, and institutions. The team
anticipates frontloading IPF disbursements and backloading PBC-based disbursements to provide the Government with
sufficient time to implement actions for achieving PBCs without jeopardizing the cash flow for project activities and
contractual obligations. Specific disbursement-linked actions will be specified in greater detail during project preparation.
PBCs are targeted towards the results areas incentivizing national level policy and regulations wherein NGAs are
responsible.



                                                                                                                          Page 8



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


27. These results areas also mirror local level actions required, which are further incentivized through Performance-based
Grants (PBGs) to LGUs. PBCs and PBGs will serve as the two wheels of incentives, one for the national level and the other
for local level. Building LGU capacity coupled with incentives or reward systems to improve their service delivery
obligations could be a key to unlocking improved performance of the sector. Across the world, the World Bank has
financed 35 operations that use an incentive and results-based approach to improve SWM service delivery, often coupled
with investments in larger SWM infrastructure. The results-based approach has tested the use of 62 types of results
indicators and concluded the importance of a longer time horizon for such operations (5-6 years) and a focus on 6-8
indicators to achieve objectives.
28. There are successful performance-based precedents in the country. The World Bank is financing a $178m Philippines
Multisectoral Nutrition Project (PMNP) over the past four years, adopting a results-based approach and utilizing
performance-based grants (PBGs) to incentivize 235 LGUs to take specific actions defined by six key performance
indicators upon which disbursements are made via the Department of Health, the National Government Agency charged
with budget and oversight. The Department of Interior and Local Governments (DILG) has more than two decades of
experience operationalizing an incentive grant based on LGU achievement of indicators stipulated under the Seal of Good
Local Governance (SGLG). The proposed Clean Philippines MPA takes successful global and local lessons on board and
adopts an approach based on them.
29. Rational for the choice of instrument. The project is proposed to be an IPF loan with PBCs given its reform orientation
and results-based approach. A country specific context in the Philippines for PforRs is that the funding does not flow to
NGAs, but rather sits in the general budget under DOF, which poses challenges to provide the NGAs with sufficient financial
resources and incentives to execute project activities to achieve the targeted results.
30. The MPA’s first phase “Clean Metro Manila” will consist of four components, following the overall MPA design
structure:
31. Component 1: Strengthening policies and institutions for improved SWM (US$40 million IBRD). This component
includes a combination of technical assistance, training, and other input-based approaches (estimated at around US$10
million), and PBCs (for around US$30 million, see table below for details). Overall, the risks related to the achievement of
PBCs are not assessed to be high, as the PBCs are fully aligned with and linked to the activities that will be financed under
the project. Most of the PBCs are targeted towards strengthening institutional systems and practices that have been
agreed with the NGAs. The Eligible Expenditure Program (EEP) and the Verification Protocol for the PBCs (likely to share
an Independent Verification Agent for the PBGs under Component 2) will be detailed during project preparation.
32. Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening National Government Agencies. Proposed activities under this sub-component
include:
  MMDA support, with (i) Transaction Advisory Services (TAS) to improve waste service contracts through (a) analyzing
  the costs of waste collection, transport, treatment and disposal, develop a waste fee model for use by MMDA and LGUs,
  (b) developing contract performance indicators, including for integration of informal waste sector in material recovery
  and circular economy facilities, and (c) supporting MMDA and LGUs to include these into the waste service contract; (ii)
  a waste fee payment system to make it easier for LGUs to charge waste services to waste generator, and support to
  prepare cost recovery plans; (iii) support for tech-enabled information systems to measure plastic pollution into the
  ocean in the NCR, and dMRV systems for landfill gas facilities; (iv) develop guidelines and incentives for clusters of LGUs
  to invest in centralized upgraded material recovery facilities (MRF) and circular economy and integrated SWM facilities;
  and (v) formulate and implement programs for the integration of informal waste pickers in material recovery and circular
  economy facilities, and more general inclusion of the informal waste sector in the waste sector including provision of
  incentives for consolidation.



                                                                                                                         Page 9



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


  DENR support will be further defined during project preparation. Potential support areas include: (i) waste vehicle
  tracking, information and monitoring, reporting, and evaluation systems; (ii) a tech-enabled information system and
  dashboard that measures plastic pollution into the ocean beyond the NCR and compatible and linked to the system
  within MMDA for better integration and joint decision-making, and the review and vetting of dMRV systems for landfill
  gas facilities as per Article 6 (voluntary compliance) agreements under the Paris Agreement; (iii) develop updated
  guidelines and standards for landfills, material recovery and circular economy facilities and dumpsite remediation as
  well as standard operating procedures and manuals for their operation; and (iv) development of policies, regulations
  and standards for improved plastic management, to reduce single use plastics and support implementation of the EPR.


                  Policy Goal                                     Proposed PBC                       Responsible NGA
 Policy Goal 1: Increase waste recovery and   Solid waste recovered, recycled, composted, and/ or        MMDA
 diversion                                    treated with other techniques
                                              National DMRV system established and operational            DENR
                                              Adoption and implementation of automated weight-            DENR
                                              based or volume-based charging schemes for tipping
                                              fees
 Policy Goal 2: Phase out of mixed waste      Source segregation mandated and implemented for         DENR, MMDA
                                              commercial buildings, markets, institutional waste
 Policy Goal 3: Improve financial             Waste fee payment system established and                    DILG
 sustainability for solid waste management    operational at the national level


33. Sub-component 1.2: Capacity building and establishment of a national knowledge network. Through this
subcomponent, the first phase will support the creation of a cadre of dedicated and well-trained personnel who will
become known go-to “Clean Metro Manila” experts on key SWM technical and operational aspects. Capacity building
activities will target stakeholders from government departments to NGOs to communities to private sector, all aimed at
strengthening waste management. It will enable community participation, including support for informal workers, using
the best available technologies and pedagogic approaches for capacity building. It will also work with academic institutions
and knowledge centers to establish a platform to facilitate exchange programs, dialogue, research, and development
networks. The exchange programs will be designed to enhance the sharing of new knowledge, improve scientific
understanding, and help to build field-related decision support over systems and processes. It will support the
establishment of an NCR-wide virtual learning center that will link to other cities supported by the Bank in improving SWM
infrastructure and service delivery from an operational perspective. This will contribute to strengthening the learning
agenda, which is crucial to the sustainability of investments. This is envisaged to be housed at DENR’s National Ecology
Center (NEC) which conducts knowledge and information dissemination, education, and training for LGUs.
34. Sub-component 1.3: Project Coordination and Management. This sub-component will support project coordination
and management, including key staff and project operational costs for all matters related to compliance with the World
Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework, fiduciary aspects, grievance redress, the implementation of communication
strategies, stakeholder engagement and Monitoring and Evaluation. Additional technical and management support will
be engaged as needed.
35. Component 2: Improving local service delivery for better solid waste management (US$150 million IBRD). The
component will generate incentives for LGUs to improve and then scale improved solid waste service delivery through
results-based financing, specifically Performance-Based Grants (PBGs).
36. Key results areas for the PBGs have been co-identified with NGAs and LGUs (between June and December 2025
through a series of consultations) for the project as a result of a stocktaking assessment against the RA 9003 which serves


                                                                                                                        Page 10



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


as the umbrella policy framework for solid waste management in the Philippines. These initial areas include: 1) planning
(e.g., meeting agreed quality standards for LGU-level Solid Waste Management Plans, improved data collection
technologies, protocols and methodologies, adoption of standardized capex and opex calculations), 2) technical (e.g.,
source segregation, verified increases in materials recovery and diversion, access to city-wide MRFs), 3) institutional (e.g.,
strengthened institutional systems: appointment of qualified permanent staff on SWM, reporting of verified sector data
to a centralized database to be established by the project), and 4) financial (i.e., increase in local budget allocation and
tariff collection, ringfencing budget for the sector, financial sustainability plans in place) among others.
37. PBGs will be comprised of a basic allocation, and a performance-based incentive allocation, with the former likely to
be 20-30 percent of the total allocation. PBGs will be funded through this component as additional financial allocations
above recipient LGU’s current budgetary allocation for the sector, considering the following:
    PBG size: PBGs will target the 17 LGUs in the NCR. The PBG scheme will run for five years and will comprise four
    annual cycles. A preliminary estimate of the grant size is US$2-3 per capita annum based on global practices, which
    is likely to be around US$140-210 million given an estimated NCR population of approximately 14 million. A
    municipal finance assessment and baseline survey is underway to ensure that the size of the grants would be
    sufficient to incentivize LGUs to comply with the performance measures and make meaningful interventions without
    being too large for existing absorptive capacity and sustainability.
    Aligning expenditure with SWM planning: The expenditure must be aligned with the 10-year city-level SWM Plans
    (currently being revised by LGUs for DENR-led NSWMC approval), stipulated under the Ecological SWM Act (RA
    9003). This is expected to be completed before project effectiveness for the 17 NCR LGUs. The PBGs can finance
    both capital and operational expenses (primary collection and transfer, small to medium MRFs, operation and
    maintenance, Information and Educational Campaigns (IEC), technical studies) linked to improved SWM plans of
    LGUs and subject to a list of positive/ negative investments to be agreed upon during project preparation (see Annex
    2).
    Target LGU readiness filter: To participate in the project, LGUs will have to meet a series of readiness criteria,
    minimum conditions and performance targets to gain access to the grant allocation. (see Annex 2)
38. PBG indicators which sets results targets for grant allocation will cover three areas: service delivery (segregation
and diversion), financial sustainability, and governance and institutions. Some of the indicators will be discrete (yes/no),
while others will be scalable, meaning that the disbursements will be proportionate to the extent of achievement. Some
indicators may also provide flexibility to be achieved throughout the program.
39. Compliance with minimum conditions (technical, fiduciary and safeguards aspects) and achievement of the
performance targets will be verified by an Independent Verification Agency (IVA). They will be further reviewed by
national government agencies and endorsed by a proposed Central Program Coordination Unit (CPCU). A summary of the
PBG structure and agreed indicators will be presented in a table prior to Appraisal, and a detailed description of all the
design elements of the PBG will be included in a dedicated Grant Manual.
40. Component 3: Improving waste infrastructure and plastic waste management for a circular economy (US$140
million IBRD). The component will assist MMDA in supporting LGUs in the NCR in their transition from mixed waste
management to (source) segregated waste management, recovery and treatment, and reduce plastic pollution in priority
areas.
41. Sub-component 3.1: Metro and Citywide MRF and Circular Economy Support. The sub-component will finance
design, construction, and supervision of key infrastructure needed to transition toward a more circular economy.




                                                                                                                         Page 11



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


Proposed investments include: (a) centralized, city-wide “clustered” MRFs12 and circular economy facilities13 with possible
appropriate technologies to be further assessed, including composting, refuse derived fuel, anaerobic digestion, and black
soldier fly (larvae) that would enable the recovery of even low value plastics and organic/food waste14. This in turn would
help meet landfill diversion targets and move LGUs toward source-segregated waste15. Due to the limited land available
in the NCR, clustering of LGUs with joint access to the MRFs with circular economy facilities will be supported through
establishment of a gate fee and inter-LGU agreements16; (b) advanced MRFs and circular economy facilities at existing
landfill sites (which could be both privately owned and operated, publicly owned and privately operated or publicly owned
and operated) for advanced processing of waste; and (c) rehabilitation and greening of landfills, including support for (i)
LGU landfill rehabilitation of public lands and possible placement of MRF and circular economy facilities – the Lingunan
Transfer Station in Valenzuela could be one option for dumpsite rehabilitation with enhanced material recovery and
circular economy facility in addition to the waste transfer station; (ii) landfill gas capture, destruction, and crediting
systems for methane emissions reduction with provisions of transforming gas capture fields into green spaces. Establishing
high integrity emission reduction credits is critical to advance revenues and support cost recovery. By generating electricity
from landfill gas capture, operators can offset fossil fuel use and sell power to the grid, creating new revenue streams for
local governments and private sector partners. The sale of high integrity certified emission reductions (CERs) through
robust carbon crediting mechanisms could provide additional financial incentives, making these projects more attractive
and viable, especially when CER prices are favorable and trusted digital monitoring, reporting, and verification (dMRV)
systems are in place, supporting landfill gas projects across multiple landfills in the NCR first and then further scaled across
the nation; (c) tech-enabled monitoring equipment for waste collection and transport vehicles. The sub-component will
also finance detailed investment preparation, including design and bidding documents, ESF documents, and construction
supervision.
42. Subcomponent 3.2: Waste and Plastic Clean Up Technology and Greening Systems. The sub-component is aimed at
curbing plastic waste pollution, and will finance the design and construction of the necessary infrastructure, including: (a)
river, lake, bay clean up barges, equipment, and technology; (b) MRFs and circular economy facilities at key locations along
riverbanks within the NCR and Manila Bay as per MMDA’s mandate; (c) greening activities in selected LGUs to reduce
flooding; (d) removing plastic waste from NCR pumping stations and watershed catchment areas and waste arising from
floods (“flood waste”); and (e) support for improving and scaling MMDA’s community-level and flagship “Bayanihan sa
Estero: Malinis na Estero Pamayanan Protektado” program that is a joint effort with NGAs, LGUs, CSOs, private sector
partners to intensify efforts in cleaning and maintaining drainage systems and waterways across Metro Manila to mitigate
severe flooding and support community-level solid waste management.
43. Component 4: Innovation, learning and public awareness for behavioral change (US$20 million IBRD). This
component will support the preparation of studies, workshops, research grants, innovative technology, and design and
deployment of multi-media public awareness and education campaigns.
44. Sub-component 4.1: Innovation. This sub-component will support the development of a new and alternative (to
plastic) material economy and support innovative circular solutions for green jobs and green growth. It includes, amongst

12 Material recovery facilities recover different fractions of the waste, such as glass, high value plastics and other recyclables but do not necessarily

treat the waste into usable products.
13 Circular economy facilities treat the (segregated) waste into products such as compost, refuse derived fuel or black soldier fly larvae.
14 As part of preparation, the operation and maintenance costs will be analyzed for different possible technologies as well as potential revenues from

the products and potential additional revenues from carbon credits. Short term and longer term gate fee requirements and accompanying waste fee
increases to support cost recovery and recommended options for ownership and management will be determined by appraisal.
15 Landfill diversion and segregated waste systems would also reduce methane emissions and plastic pollution and stimulate a more circular economy

that could catalyze the creation of green jobs. Material recovery and circular economy facilities have been known to support the integration of
informal waste workers into the waste sector too.
16 The clustering requires greater LGU collaboration and involvement in the organization of facility operations and management, funding of operating

costs, and operational cost recovery.

                                                                                                                                                   Page 12



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


others: (a) a roadmap and action plan toward a new material economy, (b) new material research grants, (c) market
studies for new material value chains, (d) youth-focused hackathons and innovation prizes, (e) pilots testing Ai-enabled
DMRV technology for landfill methane/GHG capture and crediting; (e) testing and scaling Ai-enabled waste flow capture
in canals, rivers, and Manila Bay that leads to transboundary waterways integrated with knowledge; and (f) a national
waste flow tracking system and dashboard with NGAs.
45. Sub-component 4.2: Public awareness and education for behavioral change. The sub-component will support (i)
NCR-wide behavioral change and education programs, including possible introduction of education material into school
curriculum; (ii) tv, radio, and social media programs with environmental influencers; (iii) national and NCR programs
enabling social preparedness; (iv) public and citizen engagement and campaigns; and (d) baseline, mid-term, and end of
project surveys.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



The Environment risk is High due to significant and irreversible nature of potential risks and impacts of project activities.
Landfill and dump site rehabilitation and closure may result in significant surface water, ground water and soil
contamination, as well as community health and safety risks due to fire and explosion, if not managed properly. There is
also potential risk of adverse impact on biodiversity for the new operations if siting is not selected properly. Project
activities cover a large geographic area covering Metro Manila in the first phase. Borrower has no previous experience in
WBG ESF and Borrower’s ES capacity is poor. Construction and rehabilitation of landfill and centralized MRF activities
might result in civil work-related air, dust, noise, water and groundwater pollution, construction and hazardous waste
generation. Leachate generation and runoff at landfill and dumpsites sites may result in surface and ground water, and
soil contamination. Waste-to-energy activities may result in hazardous air emissions depending on the waste content and
combustion conditions. Ash and residues resulting from WTE might include hazardous materials. Waste collection and
transport activities may result in air emissions including dust and bio-aerosols, odors, and vehicle emissions; contaminated
runoff; and noise and vibration. Locations and details of project activities are not known at this stage. Environmental risks
and impacts will be assessed further during appraisal stage and ESMF including LMP and ESIA will be prepared. The Social
risk rating is High due to these factors: (i) land-intensive SWM infrastructure, notably new citywide MRFs/CEFs and landfill
remediation projects proposed in highly dense urban areas in Metro Manila; (ii) presence of individuals, groups and
communities (e.g., land occupants and IWWs) facing potential physical and/or economic displacement, safety, and health
risks; (iii) limited knowledge, experience and capacity on the ESF, including application of standards for complex activities
like resettlement and livelihood restoration planning and implementation; and (iv) contextual risks in host communities,
where there is land shortage, potential zoning conflicts, and land disputes involving community-based organizations,

                                                                                                                        Page 13



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


private sector, and national housing agencies. Community-based SWM projects supported by PBGs have moderate to
substantial social risks that can be managed through additional resources and the strengthening of existing community
and institutional structures. Meaningful social benefits that can arise from the project include direct and multiplier effects
on local labor and employment; increased waste segregation at source from public awareness programs; streamlined
community-driven waste reduction, segregation and diversion and integration of the informal waste sector in the recycling
value chain, inclusion in local SWM plans. Key social risk areas requiring due diligence are as follows: (i) exclusion of
vulnerable groups in project design, benefit-sharing, GRM, and adverse processes impacting them like involuntary
resettlement; (ii) SEA/SH risks associated with major civil works in urban areas and dense neighborhoods and lack of
dedicated consultations with women and girls, and groups representing them; (iii) occupational health and safety (OHS),
poor working conditions and lack of labor protection for vulnerable workers; (iv) tenure and displacement issues in lands
targeted for or new MRFs/CEFs, and landfill rehabilitation; and (v) possible adverse physical and/or visual impacts for built
heritage in host LGUs in proximity or within the influence area of infra investments and other earth-moving activities.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Pawan G. Patil
   Senior Environmental Economist

   Katelijn Van den Berg
   Senior Environmental Specialist

   Yuko Arai
   Senior Urban Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Republic of the Philippines

 Implementing Agencies
  Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG)

  Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR)

  Metro Manila Development Authority (MMDA)

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                                                                                                                         Page 14



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Clean Metro Manila(P515014)


The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                 Pawan G. Patil, Katelijn Van den Berg, Yuko Arai

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:            Marc Peter Sadler                       10-Dec-2025

Country Director:                    Zafer Mustafaoglu                       03-Feb-2026




                                                                                                  Page 15



                                                                                           Official Use Only
